'Tis Nancy's birth-day--raise your strains,
Ye nymphs of the Parnassian plains,
And sing with more than usual glee
To Nancy, who was born for me.
Tell the blythe Graces as they bound,
Luxuriant in the buxom round;
They're not more elegantly free,
Than Nancy, who was born for me.
Tell royal Venus, tho' she rove,
The queen of the immortal grove,
That she must share her golden fee
With Nancy, who was born for me.
Tell Pallas, tho' th'Athenian school,
And ev'ry trite pedantic fool,
On her to place the palm agree,
'Tis Nancy's, who was born for me.
Tell spotless Dian, tho' she range,
The regent of the up-land grange,
In chastity she yields to thee,
O Nancy, who was born for me.
Tell Cupid, Hymen, and tell Jove,
With all the pow'rs of life and love,
That I'd disdain to breathe or be,
If Nancy was not born for me.
Let Elizur rejoice with the Partridge, who is a prisoner of state and is proud of his keepers.
Let Shedeur rejoice with Pyrausta, who dwelleth in a medium of fire, which God hath adapted for him.
Let Shelumiel rejoice with Olor, who is of a goodly savour, and the very look of him harmonizes the mind.
Let Jael rejoice with the Plover, who whistles for his live, and foils the marksmen and their guns.
Let Raguel rejoice with the Cock of Portugal -- God send good Angels to the allies of England!
Let Hobab rejoice with Necydalus, who is the Greek of a Grub.
Let Zurishaddai with the Polish Cock rejoice -- The Lord restore peace to Europe.
Let Zuar rejoice with the Guinea Hen -- The Lord add to his mercies in the WEST!
Let Chesed rejoice with Strepsiceros, whose weapons are the ornaments of his peace.
Let Hagar rejoice with Gnesion, who is the right sort of eagle, and towers the highest.
Let Libni rejoice with the Redshank, who migrates not but is translated to the upper regions.
Let Nahshon rejoice with the Seabreese, the Lord give the sailors of his Spirit.
Let Helon rejoice with the Woodpecker -- the Lord encourage the propagation of trees!
Let Amos rejoice with the Coote -- prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
Let Ephah rejoice with Buprestis, the Lord endue us with temperance and humanity, till every cow have her mate!
Let Sarah rejoice with the Redwing, whose harvest is in the frost and snow.
Let Rebekah rejoice with Iynx, who holds his head on one side to deceive the adversary.
Let Shuah rejoice with Boa, which is the vocal serpent.
Let Ehud rejoice with Onocrotalus, whose braying is for the glory of God, because he makes the best musick in his power.
Let Shamgar rejoice with Otis, who looks about him for the glory of God, and sees the horizon compleat at once.
Let Bohan rejoice with the Scythian Stag -- he is beef and breeches against want and nakedness.
Let Achsah rejoice with the Pigeon who is an antidote to malignity and will carry a letter.
Let Tohu rejoice with the Grouse -- the Lord further the cultivating of heaths and the peopling of deserts.
Let Hillel rejoice with Ammodytes, whose colour is deceitful and he plots against the pilgrim's feet.
Let Eli rejoice with Leucon -- he is an honest fellow, which is a rarity.
Let Jemuel rejoice with Charadrius, who is from the HEIGHT and the sight of him is good for the jaundice.
Let Pharaoh rejoice with Anataria, whom God permits to prey upon the ducks to check their increase.
Let Lotan rejoice with Sauterelle. Blessed be the name of the Lord from the Lote-tree to the Palm.
Let Dishon rejoice with the Landrail, God give his grace to the society for preserving the game.
Let Hushim rejoice with the King's Fisher, who is of royal beauty, tho' plebeian size.
Let Machir rejoice with Convolvulus, from him to the ring of Saturn, which is the girth of Job; to the signet of God -- from Job and his daughters BLESSED BE JESUS.
Let Atad bless with Eleos, the nightly Memorialist ?????????????? ?????????? .
Let Jamim rejoice with the Bittern -- blessed be the name of Jesus for Denver Sluice, Ruston, and the draining of the fens.
Let Ohad rejoice with Byturos who eateth the vine and is a minister of temperance.
Let Zohar rejoice with Cychramus who cometh with the quails on a particular affair.
Let Serah, the daughter of Asher, rejoice with Ceyx, who maketh his cabin in the Halcyon's hold.
Let Magdiel rejoice with Ascarides, which is the life of the bowels -- the worm hath a part in our frame.
Let Becher rejoice with Oscen who terrifies the wicked, as trumpet and alarm the coward.
Let Shaul rejoice with Circos, who hath clumsy legs, but he can wheel it the better with his wings. --
Let Hamul rejoice with the Crystal, who is pure and translucent.
Let Ziphion rejoice with the Tit-Lark who is a groundling, but he raises the spirits.
Let Mibzar rejoice with the Cadess, as is their number, so are their names, blessed be the Lord Jesus for them all.
Let Jubal rejoice with Cascilia, the woman and the slow-worm praise the name of the Lord.
Let Arodi rejoice with the Royston Crow, there is a society of them at Trumpington and Cambridge.
Let Areli rejoice with the Criel, who is a dwarf that towereth above others.
Let Phuvah rejoice with Platycerotes, whose weapons of defence keep them innocent.
Let Shimron rejoice with the Kite, who is of more value than many sparrows.
Let Sered rejoice with the Wittal -- a silly bird is wise unto his own preservation.
Let Elon rejoice with Attelabus, who is the Locust without wings.
Let Jahleel rejoice with the Woodcock, who liveth upon suction and is pure from his diet.
Let Shuni rejoice with the Gull, who is happy in not being good for food.
Let Ezbon rejoice with Musimon, who is from the ram and she-goat.
Let Barkos rejoice with the Black Eagle, which is the least of his species and the best-natured.
Let Bedan rejoice with Ossifrage -- the bird of prey and the man of prayer.
Let Naomi rejoice with Pseudosphece who is between a wasp and a hornet.
Let Ruth rejoice with the Tumbler -- it is a pleasant thing to feed him and be thankful.
Let Ram rejoice with the Fieldfare, who is a good gift from God in the season of scarcity.
Let Manoah rejoice with Cerastes, who is a Dragon with horns.
Let Talmai rejoice with Alcedo, who makes a cradle for it's young, which is rock'd by the winds.
Let Bukki rejoice with the Buzzard, who is clever, with the reputation of a silly fellow.
Let Michal rejoice with Leucocruta who is a mixture of beauty and magnanimity.
Let Abiah rejoice with Morphnus who is a bird of passage to the Heavens.
Let Hur rejoice with the Water-wag-tail, who is a neighbour, and loves to be looked at.
Let Dodo rejoice with the purple Worm, who is cloathed sumptuously, tho he fares meanly.
Let Ahio rejoice with the Merlin who is a cousin german of the hawk.
Let Joram rejoice with the Water-Rail, who takes his delight in the river.
Let Chileab rejoice with Ophion who is clean made, less than an hart, and a Sardinian.
Let Shephatiah rejoice with the little Owl, which is the wingged Cat.
Let Ithream rejoice with the great Owl, who understandeth that which he professes.
Let Abigail rejoice with Lethophagus -- God be gracious to the widows indeed.
Let Anathoth bless with Saurix, who is a bird of melancholy.
Let Shammua rejoice with the Vultur who is strength and fierceness.
Let Shobab rejoice with Evech who is of the goat kind which is meditation and pleasantry.
Let Ittai the Gittite rejoice with the Gerfalcon amicus certus in re incert?? cernitur.
Let Ibhar rejoice with the Pochard -- a child born in prosperity is the chiefest blessing of peace.
Let Elishua rejoice with Cantharis -- God send bread and milk to the children.
Let Chimham bless with Drepanis who is a passenger from the sea to heaven.
Let Toi rejoice with Percnopteros which haunteth the sugar-fens.
Let Nepheg rejoice with Cenchris which is the spotted serpent.
Let Japhia rejoice with Buteo who hath three testicles.
Let Gibeon rejoice with the Puttock, who will shift for himself to the last extremity.
Let Elishama rejoice with Myl??cos ???????????? ?????????? ?????????????? ?????????????????? . ???????????? ?????????? .
Let Elimelech rejoice with the Horn-Owl who is of gravity and amongst my friends in the tower.
Let Eliada rejoice with the Gier-eagle who is swift and of great penetration.
Let Eliphalet rejoice with Erodius who is God's good creature, which is sufficient for him.
Let Jonathan, David's nephew, rejoice with Oripelargus who is noble by his ascent.
Let Sheva rejoice with the Hobby, who is the service of the great.
Let Ahimaaz rejoice with the Silver-Worm who is a living mineral.
Let Shobi rejoice with the Kastrel -- blessed be the name JESUS in falconry and in the MALL
Let Elkanah rejoice with Cymindis -- the Lord illuminate us against the powers of darkness.
Let Ziba rejoice with Glottis whose tongue is wreathed in his throat.
Let Micah rejoice with the spotted Spider, who counterfeits death to effect his purposes.
Let Rizpah rejoice with the Eyed Moth who is beautiful in corruption.
Let Naharai, Joab's armour-bearer rejoice with Rock who is a bird of stupendous magnitude.
Let Abiezer, the Anethothite, rejoice with Phrynos who is the scaled frog.
Let Nachon rejoice with Parcas who is a serpent more innocent than others.
Let Lapidoth with Percnos -- the Lord is the builder of the wall of CHINA -- REJOICE.
Let Ahinoam rejoice with Prester -- The seed of the woman hath bruised the serpents head.
Let Phurah rejoice with Penelopes, the servant of Gideon with the fowl of the brook.
Let Jether, the son of Gideon, rejoice with Ecchetae which are musical grashoppers.
Let Hushai rejoice with the Ospray who is able to parry the eagle.
Let Eglah rejoice with Phalaris who is a pleasant object upon the water.
Let Haggith rejoice with the white Weasel who devoureth the honey and it's maker.
Let Abital rejoice with Ptyas who is arrayed in green and gold.
Let Maacah rejoice with Dryophyte who was blessed of the Lord in the valley.
Let Zabud Solomon's friend rejoice with Oryx who is a frolicksome mountaineer.
Let Adoniram the receiver general of the excise rejoice with Hypnale the sleepy adder.
Let Pedahel rejoice with Pityocampa who eateth his house in the pine.
Let Ibzam rejoice with the Brandling -- the Lord further the building of bridges and making rivers navigable.
Let Gilead rejoice with Gentle -- the Lord make me a fisher of men.
Let Zelophehad rejoice with Ascalabotes who casteth not his coat till a new one is prepared for him.
Let Mahlah rejoice with Pellos who is a tall bird and stately.
Let Tirzah rejoice with Tylus which is the Cheeslip and food for the chicken.
Let Hoglah rejoice with Leontophonos who will kill the lion, if he is eaten.
Let Milcah rejoice with the Horned Beetle who will strike a man in the face.
Let Noah rejoice with Hibris who is from a wild boar and a tame sow.
Let Abdon rejoice with the Glede who is very voracious and may not himself be eaten.
Let Zuph rejoice with Dipsas, whose bite causeth thirst.
Let Schechem of Manasseh rejoice with the Green Worm whose livery is of the field.
Let Gera rejoice with the Night Hawk -- blessed are those who watch when others sleep.
Let Anath rejoice with Rauca who inhabiteth the root of the oak.
Let Cherub rejoice with the Cherub who is a bird and a blessed Angel.
* * *
For I am not without authority in my jeopardy, which I derive inevitably from the glory of the name of the Lord.
For I bless God whose name is Jealous -- and there is a zeal to deliver us from everlasting burnings.
For my existimation is good even amongst the slanderers and my memory shall arise for a sweet savour unto the Lord.
For I bless the PRINCE of PEACE and pray that all the guns may be nail'd up, save such are for the rejoicing days.
For I have abstained from the blood of the grape and that even at the Lord's table.
For I have glorified God in GREEK and LATIN, the consecrated languages spoken by the Lord on earth.
For I meditate the peace of Europe amongst family bickerings and domestic jars.
For the HOST is in the WEST -- the Lord make us thankful unto salvation.
For I preach the very GOSPEL of CHRIST without comment and with this weapon shall I slay envy.
For I bless God in the rising generation, which is on my side.
For I have translated in the charity, which makes things better and I shall be translated myself at the last.
For he that walked upon the sea, hath prepared the floods with the Gospel of peace.
For the merciful man is merciful to his beast, and to the trees that give them shelter.
For he hath turned the shadow of death into the morning,the Lord is his name.
For I am come home again, but there is nobody to kill the calf or to pay the musick.
For the hour of my felicity, like the womb of Sarah, shall come at the latter end.
For I shou'd have avail'd myself of waggery, had not malice been multitudinous.
For there are still serpents that can speak -- God bless my head, my heart and my heel.
For I bless God that I am of the same seed as Ehud, Mutius Sc??vola, and Colonel Draper.
For the word of God is a sword on my side -- no matter what other weapon a stick or a straw.
For I have adventured myself in the name of the Lord, and he hath marked me for his own.
For I bless God for the Postmaster general and all conveyancers of letters under his care especially Allen and Shelvock.
For my grounds in New Canaan shall infinitely compensate for the flats and maynes of Staindrop Moor.
For the praise of God can give to a mute fish the notes of a nightingale.
For I have seen the White Raven and Thomas Hall of Willingham and am my self a greater curiosity than both.
For I look up to heaven which is my prospect to escape envy by surmounting it.
For if Pharaoh had known Joseph, he woud have blessed God and me for the illumination of the people.
For I pray God to bless improvements in gardening till London be a city of palm-trees.
For I pray to give his grace to the poor of England, that Charity be not offended and that benevolence may increase.
For in my nature I quested for beauty, but God, God hath sent me to sea for pearls.
For there is a blessing from the STONE of JESUS which is founded upon hell to the precious jewell on the right hand of God.
For the nightly Visitor is at the window of the impenitent, while I sing a psalm of my own composing.
For there is a note added to the scale, which the Lord hath made fuller, stronger and more glorious.
For I offer my goat as he browses the vine, bless the Lord from chambering and drunkeness.
For there is a traveling for the glory of God without going to Italy or France.
For I bless the children of Asher for the evil I did them and the good I might have received at their hands.
For I rejoice like a worm in the rain in him that cherishes and from him that tramples.
For I am ready for the trumpet and alarm to fight, to die and to rise again.
For the banish'd of the Lord shall come about again, for so he hath prepared for them.
For sincerity is a jewel which is pure and transparent, eternal and inestimable.
For my hands and my feet are perfect as the sublimity of Naphtali and the felicity of Asher.
For the names and number of animals are as the name and number of the stars. --
For I pray the Lord Jesus to translate my MAGNIFICAT into verse and represent it.
For I bless the Lord Jesus from the bottom of Royston Cave to the top of King's Chapel.
For I am a little fellow, which is intitled to the great mess by the benevolence of God my father.
For I this day made over my inheritance to my mother in consideration of her infirmities.
For I this day made over my inheritance to my mother in consideration of her age.
For I this day made over my inheritance to my mother in consideration of her poverty.
For I bless the thirteenth of August, in which I had the grace to obey the voice of Christ in my conscience.
For I bless the thirteenth of August, in which I was willing to run all hazards for the sake of the name of the Lord.
For I bless the thirteenth of August, in which I was willing to be called a fool for the sake of Christ.
For I lent my flocks and my herds and my lands at once unto the Lord.
For nature is more various than observation tho' observers be innumerable.
For Agricola is ???????????????? .
For I pray God to bless POLLY in the blessing of Naomi and assign her to the house of DAVID.
For I am in charity with the French who are my foes and Moabites because of the Moabitish woman.
For my Angel is always ready at a pinch to help me out and to keep me up.
For CHRISTOPHER must slay the Dragon with a PHEON's head.
For they have seperated me and my bosom, whereas the right comes by setting us together.
For silly fellow! silly fellow! is against me and belongeth neither to me nor my family.
For he that scorneth the scorner hath condescended to my low estate.
For Abiah is the father of Joab and Joab of all Romans and English Men.
For they pass by me in their tour, and the good Samaritan is not yet come. --
For I bless God in the behalf of TRINITY COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE and the society of PURPLES in LONDON. --
For I have a nephew CHRISTOPHER to whom I implore the grace of God.
For I pray God bless the CAM -- Mr HIGGS and Mr and Mrs WASHBOURNE as the drops of the dew.
For I pray God bless the king of Sardinia and make him an instrument of his peace.
For I am possessed of a cat, surpassing in beauty, from whom I take occasion to bless Almighty God.
For I pray God for the professors of the University of Cambridge to attend and to amend.
For the Fatherless Children and widows are never deserted of the Lord.
For I pray God be gracious to the house of Stuart and consider their afflictions.
For I pray God be gracious to the seed of Virgil to Mr GOODMAN SMITH of King's and Joseph STUD.
For I give God the glory that I am a son of ABRAHAM a PRINCE of the house of my fathers.
For my brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks that pass away.
For I bless God for my retreat at CANBURY, as it was the place of the nativity of my children.
For I pray God to give them the food which I cannot earn for them any otherwise than by prayer.
For I pray God bless the Chinese which are of ABRAHAM and the Gospel grew with them at the first.
For I bless God in the honey of the sugar-cane and the milk of the cocoa.
For I bless God in the libraries of the learned and for all the booksellers in the world.
For I bless God in the strength of my loins and for the voice which he hath made sonorous.
For tis no more a merit to provide for oneself, but to quit all for the sake of the Lord.
For there is no invention but the gift of God, and no grace like the grace of gratitude.
For grey hairs are honourable and tell every one of them to the glory of God.
For I bless the Lord Jesus for the memory of GAY, POPE and SWIFT.
For all good words are from GOD, and all others are cant.
For I am enabled by my ascent and the Lord haith raised me above my Peers.
For I pray God bless my lord CLARENDON and his seed for ever.
For there is silver in my mines and I bless God that it is rather there then in my coffers.
For I blessed God in St James's Park till I routed all the company.
For the officers of the peace are at variance with me, and the watchman smites me with his staff.
For I am the seed of the WELCH WOMAN and speak the truth from my heart.
For they lay wagers touching my life. -- God be gracious to the winners.
For the piety of Rizpah is imitable in the Lord -- wherefore I pray for the dead.
For the Lord is my ROCK and I am the bearer of his CROSS.
For I am like a frog in the brambles, but the Lord hath put his whole armour upon me.
For I was a Viper-catcher in my youth and the Lord delivered me from his venom.
For I rejoice that I attribute to God, what others vainly ascribe to feeble man.
For I am ready to die for his sake -- who lay down his life for all mankind.
For the son of JOSHUA shall prevail against the servant of Gideon -- Good men have their betters,
For my seed shall worship the Lord JESUS as numerous and musical as the grashoppers of Paradise.
For I pray God to turn the council of Ahitophel into foolishness.
For the learning of the Lord increases daily, as the sun is an improving angel.
For I pray God for a reformation amonst the women and the restoration of the veil.
For beauty is better to look upon than to meddle with and tis good for a man not to know a woman.
For the Lord Jesus made him a nosegay and blessed it and he blessed the inhabitants of flowers.
For a faithful friend is the medicine of life, but a neighbour in the Lord is better than he.
For I stood up betimes in behalf of LIBERTY, PROPERTY and NO EXCISE.
For they began with grubbing up my trees and now they have excluded the planter.
For I am the Lord's builder and free and accepted MASON in CHRIST JESUS.
For I bless God in all gums and balsams and every thing that ministers relief to the sick.
For the Sun's at work to make me a garment and the Moon is at work for my wife.
For tall and stately are against me, but humiliation on humiliation is on my side.
For I have a providential acquaintance with men who bear the names of animals.
For I bless God to Mr Lion Mr Cock Mr Cat Mr Talbot Mr Hart Mrs Fysh Mr Grub, and Miss Lamb.
For they throw my horns in my face and reptiles make themselves wings against me.
For I bless God for the immortal soul of Mr Pigg of DOWNHAM in NORFOLK.
For I fast this day even the 31st of August N.S. to prepare for the SABBATH of the Lord.
For the bite of an Adder is cured by its greese and the malice of my enemies by their stupidity.
For I bless God in SHIPBOURNE FAIRLAWN the meadows the brooks and the hills.
For th adversary hath exasperated the very birds against me, but the Lord sustain'd me.
For I bless God for my Newcastle friends the voice of the raven and heart of the oak.
For I bless God for every feather from the wren in the sedge to the CHERUBS and their MATES.
Let Ramah rejoice with Cochineal.
Let Gaba rejoice with the Prickly Pear, which the Cochineal feeds on.
Let Nebo rejoice with the Myrtle-Leaved-Sumach as with the Skirret Jub. 2d.
Let Magbish rejoice with the Sage-Tree Phlomis as with the Goatsbeard Jub: 2d.
Let Hashum rejoice with Moon-Trefoil.
Let Netophah rejoice with Cow-Wheat.
Let Chephirah rejoice with Millet.
Let Beeroth rejoice with Sea-Buckthorn.
Let Kirjath-arim rejoice with Cacalianthemum.
Let Hadid rejoice with Capsicum Guiney Pepper.
Let Senaah rejoice with Bean Cape.
Let Kadmiel rejoice with Hemp-Agrimony.
Let Shobai rejoice with Arbor Molle.
Let Hatita rejoice with Millefolium Yarrow.
Let Ziha rejoice with Mitellia.
Let Hasupha rejoice with Turky Balm.
Let Hattil rejoice with Xeranthemum.
Let Bilshan rejoice with the Leek. David for ever! God bless the Welch March 1st 1761. N.S.
Let Sotai rejoice with the Mountain Ebony.
Let Sophereth rejoice with White Hellebore.
Let Darkon rejoice with the Melon-Thistle.
Let Jaalah rejoice with Moly wild garlick.
Let Ami rejoice with the Bladder Sena in season or out of season bless the name of the Lord.
Let Pochereth rejoice with Fleabane.
Let Keros rejoice with Tree Germander.
Let Padon rejoice with Tamnus Black Briony.
Let Mizpar rejoice with Stickadore.
Let Baanah rejoice with Napus the French Turnip.
Let Reelaiah rejoice with the Sea-Cabbage.
Let Parosh rejoice with Cacubalus Chickweed.
Let Hagab rejoice with Serpyllum Mother of Thyme. Hosanna to the memory of Q. Anne. March 8th N.S. 1761 -- God be gracious to old Windsmore.
Let Shalmai rejoice with Meadow Rue. --
Let Habaiah rejoice with Asteriscus Yellow Starwort.
Let Tel-harsa rejoice with Aparine Clivers.
Let Rehoboam rejoice with Folium Montanum. God give grace to the Young King.
Let Hanan rejoice with Poley of Crete.
Let Sheshbazzar rejoice with Polygonatum Solomon's seal.
Let Zeboim rejoice with Bastard Dittany.
Let The Queen of Sheba rejoice with Bulapathon Herb Patience.
Let Cyrus rejoice with Baccharis Plowman's Spikenard. God be gracious to Warburton.
Let Lebanah rejoice with the Golden Wingged Flycatcher a Mexican Small Bird of Passage.
Let Hagabah rejoice with Orchis. Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus for my seed in eternity.
Let Siaha rejoice with the Razor-Fish. God be gracious to John Bird and his wife.
Let Artaxerxes rejoice with Vanelloes. Palm Sunday 1761. The Lord Strengthen me.
Let Bishlam rejoice with the Cotton-bush.
Let Mithridath rejoice with Balsam of Tolu.
Let Tabeel rejoice with the Carob-Tree.
Let Ariel rejoice with Balsam of Peru, which sweats from a tree, that flowers like the Foxglove.
Let Ebed rejoice with Balsam of Gilead. God be gracious to Stede.
Let Jarib rejoice with Balsam of Capivi. The Lord strengthen my reins.
Let Shimshai rejoice with Stelis Missletoe on Fir.
Let Joiarib rejoice with Veronica Fluellen or Speedwell.
Let Tatnai rejoice with the Barbadoes Wild Olive.
Let Ezra rejoice with the Reed. The Lord Jesus make musick of it. Good Friday 1761.
Let Josiphiah rejoice with Tower-Mustard. God be gracious to Durham School.
Let Shether-boznai rejoice with Turnera. End of Lent 1761. No. 5.
Let Jozadak rejoice with Stephanitis a vine growing naturally into chaplets.
Let Jozabad rejoice with the Lily-Daffodil. Easter Day 22nd March 1761.
Let Telem rejoice with Hart's Penny-royal.
Let Abdi rejoice with Winter-green. God be gracious to Abdy.
Let Binnui rejoice with Spotted Lungwort or Couslip of Jerusalem. God give blessing with it.
Let Aziza rejoice with the Day Lily.
Let Zabbai rejoice with Buckshorn Plaintain Coronopus.
Let Ramoth rejoice with Persicaria.
Let Athlai rejoice with Bastard Marjoram.
Let Uel rejoice with Lysimachia Loose-strife which drinks of the brook by the way.
Let Kelaiah rejoice with Hermannia.
Let Elasah rejoice with Olibanum White or Male Frankinsense from an Arabian tree, good against Catarrhs and Spitting blood from which Christ Jesus deliver me.
Let Adna rejoice with Gum Opopanax from the wounded root of a species of panace Heracleum a tall plant growing to be two or three yards high with many large wings of a yellowish green -- good for old coughs and asthmas.
Let Bedeiah rejoice with Gum Sagapenum flowing from a species of Ferula which grows in Media. Lord have mercy on my breast.
Let Ishijah rejoice with Sago gotten from the inward pith of the breadtree. The Lord Jesus strengthen my whole body.
Let Chelal rejoice with Apios Virginian Liquorice Vetch.
Let Miamin rejoice with Mezereon. God be gracious to Polly and Bess and all Canbury.
Let Zebida rejoice with Tormentil good for h??morrhages in the mouth even so Lord Jesus.
Let Shemaria rejoice with Riciasides.
Let Jadau rejoice with Flixweed.
Let Shimeon rejoice with Squills.
Let Sheal rejoice with Scorpioides. God be gracious to Legg.
Let Ramiah rejoice with Water-Germander.
Let Jeziah rejoice with Viper's Grass.
Let Machnadebai rejoice with the Mink, a beast.
Let Meremoth rejoice with the Golden Titmouse of Surinam.
Let Mattenai rejoice with Hatchet Vetch.
Let Chelluh rejoice with Horehound.
Let Jaasau rejoice with Bird's foot.
Let Maadai rejoice with Golden Rod.
Let Sharai rejoice with Honey-flower.
Let Shashai rejoice with Smyrnium.
Let Hananiah the son of an apothecary rejoice with Bdellium.
Let Hassenaah rejoice with the White Beet. God be gracious to Hasse and all musicians.
Let Hachaliah rejoice with Muscus Arboreus.
Let Sanballat rejoice with Ground Moss found sometimes on human skulls.
Let Col-hozeh rejoice with Myrobalans, Bellerica, Chebula, Citrina, Emblica and Indica.
Let Meah rejoice with Varias, a kind of streaked panther. April 8th praise the name of the Lord.
Let Eliashib rejoice with Shepherd's Purse.
Let Azbuk rejoice with Valerianella Corn Sallet.
Let Geshem (which is Rain) rejoice with Kneeholm. Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus for Rain and his family and for the plenteous rain this day. April 9th 1761. N.S.
Let Bavai rejoice with Calceolus Ladies Slipper.
Let Henadad rejoice with Cacalianthemum.
Let Shallun rejoice with Mullein Tapsus barbatus good for the breast.
Let Ophel rejoice with Camara.
Let Meshezabeel rejoice with Stephanomelis. Old April bless the name of the Lord Jesus.
Let Zadok the son of Baana rejoice with Viburnum.
Let Vaniah rejoice with Pug in a pinner. God be gracious to house of Vane especially Anne.
Let Besodeiah rejoice with the Nettle.
Let Melatiah rejoice with Adonis Bird's eye.
Let Jadon rejoice with Borrage.
Let Palal rejoice with the female Balsamime. God be gracious to my wife.
Let Ezer rejoice with Basella Climbing Nightshade.
Let Uzai rejoice with Meadow Sweet.
Let Zalaph rejoice with Rose-bay.
Let Halohesh rejoice with Ambrosia, that bears a fruit like a club.
Let Malchiah Son of Rechab rejoice with the Rose-colour'd flow'ring Rush.
Let Sia rejoice with Argemone Prickly Poppy.
Let Lebana rejoice with Amaranthoides Globe Amaranth.
Let Rephaiah the Son of Hur rejoice with the Berry-bearing Angelica.
Let Harhaiah of the Goldsmiths rejoice with Segullum, the earth that detects the mine.
Let Harumaph rejoice with the Upright Honeysuckle.
Let Hashabniah rejoice with the Water Melon. Blessed be the manuscripts of Almighty God.
Let Phaseah rejoice with the Cassioberry Bush.
Let Nephishesim rejoice with Cannacorus Indian Reed.
Let Tamah rejoice with Cainito Star-Apple -- God be praised for this Eleventh of April o.s. in which I enter into the Fortieth Year of my age. Blessed. Blessed. Blessed!
Let Siloah rejoice with Guidonia with a Rose-Colour'd-Flower.
Let Benjamin a Rebuilder of Jerusalem rejoice with the Rock-Rose. Newton, bless!
Let Malchijah Son of Harim rejoice with Crysanthemoides.
Let Besai rejoice with Hesperis Queen's Gilly-Flow'r.
Let Perida rejoice with Podded Fumitory.
Let Tabbaoth rejoice with Goldy Locks. God be merciful to my wife.
Let Bakbuk rejoice with Soft Thistle.
Let Hodevah rejoice with Coronilla.
Let Tobiah rejoice with Crotolaria. God be praised for his infinite goodness and mercy.
Let Mehetabeel rejoice with Hsemanthus the Blood Flower. Blessed be the name of the Blood of the Lord Jesus.
Let Bazlith rejoice with the Horned Poppy.
Let Hagaba rejoice with the Turnsole. God be gracious to Cutting.
Let Shalmai rejoice with Lycopersicum Love-apple. God be gracious to Dunn.
Let Arah rejoice with Fritillaria the Chequer'd Tulip.
Let Raamiah rejoice with the Double Sweetscented Pione.
Let Hashub Son of Pahath-moab rejoice with the French Honeysuckle.
Let Ananiah rejoice with the Corn-Flag.
Let Nahamani rejoice with the May-apple. God give me fruit to this month.
Let Mispereth rejoice with the Ring Parrakeet.
Let Nehum rejoice with the Artichoke.
Let Ginnithon rejoice with the Bottle Flower.
Let Zidkijah rejoice with Mulberry Blight. God be gracious to Gum my fellow Prisoner.
Let Malluch rejoice with Methonica Superb Lily.
Let Jeremiah rejoice with Hemlock, which is good in outward application.
Let Bilgai rejoice with Tamalapatra Indian Leaf.
Let Maaziah rejoice with Chick Pease. God be gracious to Harris White 5th of May 1761.
Let Kelita rejoice with Xiphion the Bulbous Iris.
Let Pelaiah rejoice with Cloud-Berries. God be gracious to Peele and Ferry.
Let Azaniah rejoice with the Water Lily.
Let Rehob rejoice with Caucalis Bastard Parsley.
Let Sherebiah rejoice with Nigella, that bears a white flower.
Let Beninu rejoice with Heart-Pear. God be gracious to George Bening.
Let Bunni rejoice with Bulbine -- leaves like leek, purple flower.
Let Zatthu rejoice with the Wild Service.
Let Hizkijah rejoice with the Dwarf American Sun-Flower.
Let Azzur rejoice with the Globe-Thistle.
Let Hariph rejoice with Summer Savoury.
Let Nebai rejoice with the Wild Cucumber.
Let Magpiash rejoice with the Musk.
Let Hezir rejoice with Scorpion Sena.
***
For H is a spirit and therefore he is God.
For I is person and therefore he is God.
For K is king and therefore he is God.
For L is love and therefore he is God.
For M is musick and therefore he is God.
For N is novelty and therefore he is God.
For O is over and therefore he is God.
For P is power and therefore he is God.
For Q is quick and therefore he is God.
For R is right and therefore he is God.
For S is soul and therefore he is God.
For T is truth and therefore he is God.
For U is union and therefore he is God.
For W is worth and therefore he is God.
For X has the pow'r of three and therefore he is God.
For Y is yea and therefore he is God.
For Z is zeal and therefore he is God, whom I pray to be gracious to the Widow Davis and Davis the Bookseller.
For Christ being A and ?? is all the intermediate letters without doubt.
For there is a mystery in numbers.
For One is perfect and good being at unity in himself.
For Two is the most Imperfect of all numbers.
For every thing infinitely perfect is Three.
For the Devil is two being without God.
For he is an evil spirit male and female.
For he is called the Duce by foolish invocation on that account.
For Three is the simplest and best of all numbers.
For Four is good being square.
For Five is not so good in itself but works well in combination.
For Five is not so good in itself as it consists of two and three.
For Six is very good consisting of twice three.
For Seven is very good consisting of two compleat numbers.
For Eight is good for the same reason and propitious to me Eighth of March 1761 hallelujah.
For Nine is a number very good and harmonious.
For Cipher is a note of augmentation very good.
For innumerable ciphers will amount to something.
For the mind of man cannot bear a tedious accumulation of nothings without effect.
For infinite upon infinite they make a chain.
For the last link is from man very nothing ascending to the first Christ the Lord of All.
For the vowell is the female spirit in the Hebrew consonant.
For there are more letters in all languages not communicated.
For there are some that have the power of sentences. O rare thirteenth of march 1761.
For St Paul was caught up into the third heavens.
For there he heard certain words which it was not possible for him to understand.
For they were constructed by uncommunicated letters.
For they are signs of speech too precious to be communicated for ever.
For after ?? there follows another letter in the Hebrew tongue.
For his name is Wau and his figure is thus .
For the ??olians knew something of him in the spirit, but could not put him down.
For the figures were first communicated to Esaw. God be gracious to Musgrave.
For he was blest as a merchant.
For the blessing of Jacob was in the spirit and Esau's for temporal thrift.
For the story of Orpheus is of the truth.
For there was such a person a cunning player on the harp.
For he was a believer in the true God and assisted in the spirit.
For he play'd upon the harp in the spirit by breathing upon the strings.
For this will affect every thing that is sustaind by the spirit, even every thing in nature.
For it is the business of a man gifted in the word to prophecy good.
For it will be better for England and all the world in a season, as I prophecy this day.
For I prophecy that they will obey the motions of the spirit descended upon them as at this day.
For they have seen the glory of God already come down upon the trees.
For I prophecy that it will descend upon their heads also.
For I prophecy that the praise of God will be in every man's mouth in the Publick streets.
For I prophecy that there will be Publick worship in the cross ways and fields.
For I prophecy that the general salutation will be. The Lord Jesus prosper you. I wish you good luck in the name of the Lord Jesus!
For I prophecy that there will be more mercy for criminals.
For I prophecy that there will be less mischief concerning women.
For I prophecy that they will be cooped up and kept under due controul.
For I prophecy that there will be full churches and empty play-houses.
For I prophecy that they will learn to take pleasure in glorifying God with great cheerfulness.
For I prophecy that they will observe the Rubrick with regard to days of Fasting and Abstinence.
For I prophecy that the clergy in particular will set a better example.
For I prophecy that they will not dare to imprison a brother or sister for debt.
For I prophecy that hospitality and temperance will revive.
For I prophecy that men will be much stronger in the body.
For I prophecy that the gout, and consumptions will be curable.
For I prophecy that man will be as good as a Lupine.
For the Lupine professes his Saviour in Grain.
For the very Hebrew letter is fairly graven upon his Seed.
For with diligence the whole Hebrew Alphabet may be found in a parcel of his seed.
For this a stupendous evidence of the communicating God in externals.
For I prophecy that they will call the days by better names.
For the Lord's day is the first.
For the following is the second.
For so of the others untill the seventh.
For the seventh day is the Sabbath according to the word of God direct for ever and ever.
For I prophecy that the King will have grace to put the crown upon the altar.
For I prophecy that the name of king in England will be given to Christ alone.
For I prophecy that mm will live to a much greater age. This ripens apace God be praised.
For I prophecy that they will grow taller and stronger.
For degeneracy has done a great deal more than is in general imagined.
For men in David's time were ten feet high in general.
For they had degenerated also from the strength of their fathers.
For I prophecy that players and mimes will not be named amongst us.
For I prophecy in the favour of dancing which in mutual benevolence is for the glory of God.
For I prophecy that the exactions of Moab will soon be at an end.
For the Moabites even the French are in their chastisement for humiliation.
For I prophecy that the Reformation will make way in France when Moab is made meek by being well drubbed by the English.
For I prophecy that the Reformation will make great way by means of the Venetians.
For the Venetian will know that the Englishman is his brother.
For the Liturgy will obtain in all languages.
For England is the head and not the tail.
For England is the head of Europe in the spirit.
For Spain, Portugal and France are the heart.
For Holland and Germany are the middle.
For Italy is one of the legs.
For I prophecy that there will not be a meetinghouse within two miles of a church.
For I prophecy that schismaticks will be detected.
For I prophecy that men will learn the use of their knees.
For every thing that can be done in that posture (upon the knees) is better so done than otherwise.
For I prophecy that they will understand the blessing and virtue of the rain.
For rain is exceedingly good for the human body.
For it is good therefore to have flat roofs to the houses, as of old.
For it is good to let the rain come upon the naked body unto purity and refreshment.
For I prophecy that they will respect decency in all points.
For they will do it in conceit, word, and motion.
For they will go forth afield.
For the Devil can work upon stagnating filth to a very great degree.
For I prophecy that we shall have our horns again.
For in the day of David Men as yet had a glorious horn upon his forehead.
For this horn was a bright substance in colour and consistence as the nail of the hand.
For it was broad, thick and strong so as to serve for defence as well as ornament.
For it brightened to the Glory of God, which came upon the human face at morning prayer.
For it was largest and brightest in the best men.
For it was taken away all at once from all of them.
For this was done in the divine contempt of a general pusillanimity.
For this happened in a season after their return from the Babylonish captivity.
For their spirits were broke and their manhood impair'd by foreign vices for exaction.
For I prophecy that the English will recover their horns the first.
For I prophecy that all the nations in the world will do the like in turn.
For I prophecy that all Englishmen will wear their beards again.
For a beard is a good step to a horn.
For when men get their horns again, they will delight to go uncovered.
For it is not good to wear any thing upon the head.
For a man should put no obstacle between his head and the blessing of Almighty God.
For a hat was an abomination of the heathen. Lord have mercy upon the Quakers.
For the ceiling of the house is an obstacle and therefore we pray on the house-top.
For the head will be liable to less disorders on the recovery of its horn.
For the horn on the forehead is a tower upon an arch.
For it is a strong munition against the adversary, who is sickness and death.
For it is instrumental in subjecting the woman.
For the insolence of the woman has increased ever since Man has been crest-fallen.
For they have turned the horn into scoff and derision without ceasing.
For we are amerced of God, who has his horn.
For we are amerced of the blessed angels, who have their horns.
For when they get their horns again they will put them upon the altar.
For they give great occasion for mirth and musick.
For our Blessed Saviour had not his horn upon the face of the earth.
For this was in meekness and condescension to the infirmities of human nature at that time.
For at his second coming his horn will be exalted in glory.
For his horn is the horn of Salvation.
For Christ Jesus has exalted my voice to his own glory.
For he has answered me in the air as with a horn from Heaven to the ears of many people.
For the horn is of plenty.
For this has been the sense of all ages.
For Man and Earth suffer together.
For when Man was amerced of his horn, earth lost part of her fertility.
For the art of Agriculture is improving.
For this is evident in flowers.
For it is more especially manifest in double flowers.
For earth will get it up again by the blessing of God on the industry of man.
For the horn is of plenty because of milk and honey.
For I pray God be gracious to the Bees and the Beeves this day.
Rejoice in God, O ye Tongues; give the glory to the Lord, and the Lamb.
Nations, and languages, and every Creature, in which is the breath of Life.
Let man and beast appear before him, and magnify his name together.
Let Noah and his company approach the throne of Grace, and do homage to the Ark of their Salvation.
Let Abraham present a Ram, and worship the God of his Redemption.
Let Isaac, the Bridegroom, kneel with his Camels, and bless the hope of his pilgrimage.
Let Jacob, and his speckled Drove adore the good Shepherd of Israel.
Let Esau offer a scape Goat for his seed, and rejoice in the blessing of God his father.
Let Nimrod, the mighty hunter, bind a Leopard to the altar, and consecrate his spear to the Lord.
Let Ishmael dedicate a Tyger, and give praise for the liberty, in which the Lord has let him at large.
Let Balaam appear with an Ass, and bless the Lord his people and his creatures for a reward eternal.
Let Anah, the son of Zibion, lead a Mule to the temple, and bless God, who amerces the consolation of the creature for the service of Man.
Let Daniel come forth with a Lion, and praise God with all his might through faith in Christ Jesus.
Let Naphthali with an Hind give glory in the goodly words of Thanksgiving.
Let Aaron, the high priest, sanctify a Bull, and let him go free to the Lord and Giver of Life.
Let the Levites of the Lord take the Beavers of the brook alive into the Ark of the Testimony.
Let Eleazar with the Ermine serve the Lord decently and in purity.
Let Ithamar minister with a Chamois, and bless the name of Him, which cloatheth the naked.
Let Gershom with an Pygarg Hart bless the name of Him, who feedeth the hungry.
Let Merari praise the wisdom and power of God with the Coney, who scoopeth the rock, and archeth in the sand.
Let Kohath serve with the Sable, and bless God in the ornaments of the Temple.
Let Jehoida bless God with an Hare, whose mazes are determined for the health of the body and to parry the adversary.
Let Ahitub humble himself with an Ape before Almighty God, who is the maker of variety and pleasantry.
Let Abiathar with a Fox praise the name of the Lord, who ballances craft against strength and skill against number.
Let Moses, the Man of God, bless with a Lizard, in the sweet majesty of good-nature, and the magnanimity of meekness.
Let Joshua praise God with an Unicorn -- the swiftness of the Lord, and the strength of the Lord, and the spear of the Lord mighty in battle.
Let Caleb with an Ounce praise the Lord of the Land of beauty and rejoice in the blessing of his good Report.
Let Othniel praise God with the Rhinoceros, who put on his armour for the reward of beauty in the Lord.
Let Tola bless with the Toad, which is the good creature of God, tho' his virtue is in the secret, and his mention is not made.
Let Barak praise with the Pard -- and great is the might of the faithful and great is the Lord in the nail of Jael and in the sword of the Son of Abinoam.
Let Gideon bless with the Panther -- the Word of the Lord is invincible by him that lappeth from the brook.
Let Jotham praise with the Urchin, who took up his parable and provided himself for the adversary to kick against the pricks.
Let Boaz, the Builder of Judah, bless with the Rat, which dwelleth in hardship and peril, that they may look to themselves and keep their houses in order.
Let Obed-Edom with a Dormouse praise the Name of the Lord God his Guest for increase of his store and for peace.
Let Abishai bless with the Hyaena -- the terror of the Lord, and the fierceness, of his wrath against the foes of the King and of Israel.
Let Ethan praise with the Flea, his coat of mail, his piercer, and his vigour, which wisdom and providence have contrived to attract observation and to escape it.
Let Heman bless with the Spider, his warp and his woof, his subtlety and industry, which are good.
Let Chalcol praise with the Beetle, whose life is precious in the sight of God, tho his appearance is against him.
Let Darda with a Leech bless the Name of the Physician of body and soul.
Let Mahol praise the Maker of Earth and Sea with the Otter, whom God has given to dive and to burrow for his preservation.
Let David bless with the Bear -- The beginning of victory to the Lord -- to the Lord the perfection of excellence -- Hallelujah from the heart of God, and from the hand of the artist inimitable, and from the echo of the heavenly harp in sweetness magnifical and mighty.
Let Solomon praise with the Ant, and give the glory to the Fountain of all Wisdom.
Let Romamti-ezer bless with the Ferret -- The Lord is a rewarder of them, that diligently seek him.
Let Samuel, the Minister from a child, without ceasing praise with the Porcupine, which is the creature of defence and stands upon his arms continually.
Let Nathan with the Badger bless God for his retired fame, and privacy inaccessible to slander.
Let Joseph, who from the abundance of his blessing may spare to him, that lacketh, praise with the Crocodile, which is pleasant and pure, when he is interpreted, tho' his look is of terror and offence.
Let Esdras bless Christ Jesus with the Rose and his people, which is a nation of living sweetness.
Let Mephibosheth with the Cricket praise the God of chearfulness, hospitality, and gratitude.
Let Shallum with the Frog bless God for the meadows of Canaan, the fleece, the milk and the honey.
Let Hilkiah praise with the Weasel, which sneaks for his prey in craft, and dwelleth at ambush.
Let Job bless with the Worm -- the life of the Lord is in Humiliation, the Spirit also and the truth.
Let Elihu bless with the Tortoise, which is food for praise and thanksgiving.
Let Hezekiah praise with the Dromedary -- the zeal for the glory of God is excellence, and to bear his burden is grace.
Let Zadoc worship with the Mole -- before honour is humility, and he that looketh low shall learn.
Let Gad with the Adder bless in the simplicity of the preacher and the wisdom of the creature.
Let Tobias bless Charity with his Dog, who is faithful, vigilant, and a friend in poverty.
Let Anna bless God with the Cat, who is worthy to be presented before the throne of grace, when he has trampled upon the idol in his prank.
Let Benaiah praise with the Asp -- to conquer malice is nobler, than to slay the lion.
Let Barzillai bless with the Snail -- a friend in need is as the balm of Gilead, or as the slime to the wounded bark.
Let Joab with the Horse worship the Lord God of Hosts.
Let Shemaiah bless God with the Caterpiller -- the minister of vengeance is the harbinger of mercy.
Let Ahimelech with the Locust bless God from the tyranny of numbers.
Let Cornelius with the Swine bless God, which purifyeth all things for the poor.
Let Araunah bless with the Squirrel, which is a gift of homage from the poor man to the wealthy and increaseth good will.
Let Bakbakkar bless with the Salamander, which feedeth upon ashes as bread, and whose joy is at the mouth of the furnace.
Let Jabez bless with Tarantula, who maketh his bed in the moss, which he feedeth, that the pilgrim may take heed to his way.
Let Jakim with the Satyr bless God in the dance. --
Let Iddo praise the Lord with the Moth -- the writings of man perish as the garment, but the Book of God endureth for ever.
Let Nebuchadnezzar bless with the Grashopper -- the pomp and vanities of the world are as the herb of the field, but the glory of the Lord increaseth for ever.
Let Naboth bless with the Canker-worm -- envy is cruel and killeth and preyeth upon that which God has given to aspire and bear fruit.
Let Lud bless with the Elk, the strenuous asserter of his liberty, and the maintainer of his ground.
Let Obadiah with the Palmer-worm bless God for the remnant that is left.
Let Agur bless with the Cockatrice -- The consolation of the world is deceitful, and temporal honour the crown of him that creepeth.
Let Ithiel bless with the Baboon, whose motions are regular in the wilderness, and who defendeth himself with a staff against the assailant.
Let Ucal bless with the Cameleon, which feedeth on the Flowers and washeth himself in the dew.
Let Lemuel bless with the Wolf, which is a dog without a master, but the Lord hears his cries and feeds him in the desert.
Let Hananiah bless with the Civet, which is pure from benevolence.
Let Azarias bless with the Reindeer, who runneth upon the waters, and wadeth thro the land in snow.
Let Mishael bless with the Stoat -- the praise of the Lord gives propriety to all things.
Let Savaran bless with the Elephant, who gave his life for his country that he might put on immortality.
Let Nehemiah, the imitator of God, bless with the Monkey, who is work'd down from Man.
Let Manasses bless with the Wild-Ass -- liberty begetteth insolence, but necessity is the mother of prayer.
Let Jebus bless with the Camelopard, which is good to carry and to parry and to kneel.
Let Huz bless with the Polypus -- lively subtlety is acceptable to the Lord.
Let Buz bless with the Jackall -- but the Lord is the Lion's provider.
Let Meshullam bless with the Dragon, who maketh his den in desolation and rejoiceth amongst the ruins.
Let Enoch bless with the Rackoon, who walked with God as by the instinct.
Let Hashbadana bless with the Catamountain, who stood by the Pulpit of God against the dissensions of the Heathen.
Let Ebed-Melech bless with the Mantiger, the blood of the Lord is sufficient to do away the offence of Cain, and reinstate the creature which is amerced.
Let A Little Child with a Serpent bless Him, who ordaineth strength in babes to the confusion of the Adversary.
Let Huldah bless with the Silkworm -- the ornaments of the Proud are from the bowells of their Betters.
Let Susanna bless with the Butterfly -- beauty hath wings, but chastity is the Cherub.
Let Sampson bless with the Bee, to whom the Lord hath given strength to annoy the assailant and wisdom to his strength.
Let Amasiah bless with the Chaffer -- the top of the tree is for the brow of the champion, who has given the glory to God.
Let Hashum bless with the Fly, whose health is the honey of the air, but he feeds upon the thing strangled, and perisheth.
Let Malchiah bless with the Gnat -- it is good for man and beast to mend their pace.
Let Pedaiah bless with the Humble-Bee, who loves himself in solitude and makes his honey alone.
Let Maaseiah bless with the Drone, who with the appearance of a Bee is neither a soldier nor an artist, neither a swordsman nor smith.
Let Urijah bless with the Scorpion, which is a scourge against the murmurers -- the Lord keep it from our coasts.
Let Anaiah bless with the Dragon-fly, who sails over the pond by the wood-side and feedeth on the cressies.
Let Zorobabel bless with the Wasp, who is the Lord's architect, and buildeth his edifice in armour.
Let Jehu bless with the Hornet, who is the soldier of the Lord to extirpate abomination and to prepare the way of peace.
Let Mattithiah bless with the Bat, who inhabiteth the desolations of pride and flieth amongst the tombs.
Let Elias which is the innocency of the Lord rejoice with the Dove.
Let Asaph rejoice with the Nightingale -- The musician of the Lord! and the watchman of the Lord!
Let Shema rejoice with the Glowworm, who is the lamp of the traveller and mead of the musician.
Let Jeduthun rejoice with the Woodlark, who is sweet and various.
Let Chenaniah rejoice with Chloris, in the vivacity of his powers and the beauty of his person.
Let Gideoni rejoice with the Goldfinch, who is shrill and loud, and full withal.
Let Giddalti rejoice with the Mocking-bird, who takes off the notes of the Aviary and reserves his own.
Let Jogli rejoice with the Linnet, who is distinct and of mild delight.
Let Benjamin bless and rejoice with the Redbird, who is soft and soothing.
Let Dan rejoice with the Blackbird, who praises God with all his heart, and biddeth to be of good cheer.
For I will consider my Cat Jeoffry.
For he is the servant of the Living God duly and daily serving him.
For at the first glance of the glory of God in the East he worships in his way.
For this is done by wreathing his body seven times round with elegant quickness.
For then he leaps up to catch the musk, which is the blessing of God upon his prayer.
For he rolls upon prank to work it in.
For having done duty and received blessing he begins to consider himself.
For this he performs in ten degrees.
For first he looks upon his forepaws to see if they are clean.
For secondly he kicks up behind to clear away there.
For thirdly he works it upon stretch with the forepaws extended.
For fourthly he sharpens his paws by wood.
For fifthly he washes himself.
For sixthly he rolls upon wash.
For seventhly he fleas himself, that he may not be interrupted upon the beat.
For eighthly he rubs himself against a post.
For ninthly he looks up for his instructions.
For tenthly he goes in quest of food.
For having consider'd God and himself he will consider his neighbour.
For if he meets another cat he will kiss her in kindness.
For when he takes his prey he plays with it to give it a chance.
For one mouse in seven escapes by his dallying.
For when his day's work is done his business more properly begins.
For he keeps the Lord's watch in the night against the adversary.
For he counteracts the powers of darkness by his electrical skin and glaring eyes.
For he counteracts the Devil, who is death, by brisking about the life.
For in his morning orisons he loves the sun and the sun loves him.
For he is of the tribe of Tiger.
For the Cherub Cat is a term of the Angel Tiger.
For he has the subtlety and hissing of a serpent, which in goodness he suppresses.
For he will not do destruction, if he is well-fed, neither will he spit without provocation.
For he purrs in thankfulness, when God tells him he's a good Cat.
For he is an instrument for the children to learn benevolence upon.
For every house is incomplete without him and a blessing is lacking in the spirit.
For the Lord commanded Moses concerning the cats at the departure of the Children of Israel from Egypt.
For every family had one cat at least in the bag.
For the English Cats are the best in Europe.
For he is the cleanest in the use of his forepaws of any quadruped.
For the dexterity of his defence is an instance of the love of God to him exceedingly.
For he is the quickest to his mark of any creature.
For he is tenacious of his point.
For he is a mixture of gravity and waggery.
For he knows that God is his Saviour.
For there is nothing sweeter than his peace when at rest.
For there is nothing brisker than his life when in motion.
For he is of the Lord's poor and so indeed is he called by benevolence perpetually--Poor Jeoffry! poor Jeoffry! the rat has bit thy throat.
For I bless the name of the Lord Jesus that Jeoffry is better.
For the divine spirit comes about his body to sustain it in complete cat.
For his tongue is exceeding pure so that it has in purity what it wants in music.
For he is docile and can learn certain things.
For he can set up with gravity which is patience upon approbation.
For he can fetch and carry, which is patience in employment.
For he can jump over a stick which is patience upon proof positive.
For he can spraggle upon waggle at the word of command.
For he can jump from an eminence into his master's bosom.
For he can catch the cork and toss it again.
For he is hated by the hypocrite and miser.
For the former is afraid of detection.
For the latter refuses the charge.
For he camels his back to bear the first notion of business.
For he is good to think on, if a man would express himself neatly.
For he made a great figure in Egypt for his signal services.
For he killed the Ichneumon-rat very pernicious by land.
For his ears are so acute that they sting again.
For from this proceeds the passing quickness of his attention.
For by stroking of him I have found out electricity.
For I perceived God's light about him both wax and fire.
For the Electrical fire is the spiritual substance, which God sends from heaven to sustain the bodies both of man and beast.
For God has blessed him in the variety of his movements.
For, tho he cannot fly, he is an excellent clamberer.
For his motions upon the face of the earth are more than any other quadruped.
For he can tread to all the measures upon the music.
For he can swim for life.
For he can creep.
For I will consider my Cat Jeoffry.
For he is the servant of the Living God, duly and daily serving him.
For at the first glance of the glory of God in the East he worships in his way.
For is this done by wreathing his body seven times round with elegant quickness.
For then he leaps up to catch the musk, which is the blessing of God upon his prayer.
For he rolls upon prank to work it in.
For having done duty and received blessing he begins to consider himself.
For this he performs in ten degrees.
For first he looks upon his forepaws to see if they are clean.
For secondly he kicks up behind to clear away there.
For thirdly he works it upon stretch with the forepaws extended.
For fourthly he sharpens his paws by wood.
For fifthly he washes himself.
For sixthly he rolls upon wash.
For seventhly he fleas himself, that he may not be interrupted upon the beat.
For eighthly he rubs himself against a post.
For ninthly he looks up for his instructions.
For tenthly he goes in quest of food.
For having considered God and himself he will consider his neighbor.
For if he meets another cat he will kiss her in kindness.
For when he takes his prey he plays with it to give it a chance.
For one mouse in seven escapes by his dallying.
For when his day's work is done his business more properly begins.
For he keeps the Lord's watch in the night against the adversary.
For he counteracts the powers of darkness by his electrical skin and glaring eyes.
For he counteracts the Devil, who is death, by brisking about the life.
For in his morning orisons he loves the sun and the sun loves him.
For he is of the tribe of Tiger.
For the Cherub Cat is a term of the Angel Tiger.
For he has the subtlety and hissing of a serpent, which in goodness he suppresses.
For he will not do destruction if he is well-fed, neither will he spit without provocation.
For he purrs in thankfulness when God tells him he's a good Cat.
For he is an instrument for the children to learn benevolence upon.
For every house is incomplete without him, and a blessing is lacking in the spirit.
For the Lord commanded Moses concerning the cats at the departure of the Children of Israel
from Egypt.
For every family had one cat at least in the bag.
For the English Cats are the best in Europe.
For he is the cleanest in the use of his forepaws of any quadruped.
For the dexterity of his defense is an instance of the love of God to him exceedingly.
For he is the quickest to his mark of any creature.
For he is tenacious of his point.
For he is a mixture of gravity and waggery.
For he knows that God is his Saviour.
For there is nothing sweeter than his peace when at rest.
For there is nothing brisker than his life when in motion.
For he is of the Lord's poor, and so indeed is he called by benevolence perpetually--Poor Jeoffry!
poor Jeoffry! the rat has bit thy throat.
For I bless the name of the Lord Jesus that Jeoffry is better.
For the divine spirit comes about his body to sustain it in complete cat.
For his tongue is exceeding pure so that it has in purity what it wants in music.
For he is docile and can learn certain things.
For he can sit up with gravity, which is patience upon approbation.
For he can fetch and carry, which is patience in employment.
For he can jump over a stick, which is patience upon proof positive.
For he can spraggle upon waggle at the word of command.
For he can jump from an eminence into his master's bosom.
For he can catch the cork and toss it again.
For he is hated by the hypocrite and miser.
For the former is afraid of detection.
For the latter refuses the charge.
For he camels his back to bear the first notion of business.
For he is good to think on, if a man would express himself neatly.
For he made a great figure in Egypt for his signal services.
For he killed the Icneumon rat, very pernicious by land.
For his ears are so acute that they sting again.
For from this proceeds the passing quickness of his attention.
For by stroking of him I have found out electricity.
For I perceived God's light about him both wax and fire.
For the electrical fire is the spiritual substance which God sends from heaven to sustain the
bodies both of man and beast.
For God has blessed him in the variety of his movements.
For, though he cannot fly, he is an excellent clamberer.
For his motions upon the face of the earth are more than any other quadruped.
For he can tread to all the measures upon the music.
For he can swim for life.
For he can creep.
Let Dew, house of Dew rejoice with Xanthenes a precious stone of an amber colour.
Let Round, house of Round rejoice with Myrmecites a gern having an Emmet in it.
Let New, house of New rejoice with Nasamonites a gem of a sanguine colour with black veins.
Let Hook, house of Hook rejoice with Sarda a Cornelian -- blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus by hook.
Let Crook, house of Crook rejoice with Ophites black spotted marble -- Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus by crook. The Lord enable me to shift.
Let Lime, house of Lime rejoice with Sandareses a kind of gem in Pliny's list.
Let Linnet, house of Linnet rejoice with Tanos, which is a mean sort of Emerald.
Let Hind, house of Hind rejoice with Paederos Opal -- God be gracious to Mrs Hind, that lived at Canbury.
Let Tyrrel, house of Tyrrel rejoice with Sardius Lapis an Onyx of a black colour. God speed Hawke's Fleet.
Let Moss, house of Moss rejoice with the Pearl-Oyster behold how God has consider'd for him that lacketh.
Let Ross, house of Ross rejoice with the Great Flabber Dabber Flat Clapping Fish with hands. Vide Anson's Voyage and Psalm 98th ix.
Let Fisher, house of Fisher rejoice with Sandastros kind of burning stone with gold drops in the body of it. God be gracious to Fisher of Cambridge and to all of his name and kindred.
Let Fuller, house of Fuller rejoice with Perileucos a precious stone with a white thread descending from its face to the bottom.
Let Thorpe, house of Thorpe rejoice with Xystios an ordinary stone of the Jasper-kind.
Let Alban, house of Alban rejoice with Scorpites a precious stone in some degree of the creatures.
Let Wand, house of Wand rejoice with Synochitis a gem supposed by Pliny to have certain magical effects.
Let Freeman, house of Freeman rejoice with Carcinias a precious stone the colour of a sea-crab. The Lord raise the landed interest.
Let Quince, house of Quince rejoice with Onychipuncta a gem of the jasper kind.
Let Manly, house of Manly rejoice with the Booby a tropical bird.
Let Fage, house of Fage rejoice with the Fiddlefish -- Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus in the fish's mouth.
Let Benning, house of Benning rejoice with the Sea-Egg. Lord have mercy on the soul of Benning's wife.
Let Singleton, house of Singleton rejoice with the Hog-Plumb. Lord have mercy on the soul of Lord Vane.
Let Thickness, house of Thickness rejoice with The Papah a fruit found at Chequetan.
Let Heartly, house of Heartly rejoice with the Drummer-Fish. God be gracious to Heartly of Christ, to Marsh, Hingeston and Bill.
Let Sizer, house of Sizer rejoice with Trichros a precious stone black at bottom, white atop and blood-red in the middle.
Let Chetwind, house of Chetwind rejoice with Hammocrysos, a gem with gold sands on it.
Let Branch, house of Branch rejoice with H??matites -- Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus THE BRANCH.
Let Dongworth, house of Dongworth rejoice with Rhymay the Bread-fruit. God be gracious to the immortal soul of Richard Dongworth.
Let Randall, house of Randall rejoice with Guavoes. God give Randall success.
Let Osborne, house of Osborne rejoice with Lithizontes a sort of carbuncle. God be gracious to the Duke of Leeds and his family.
Let Oldcastle, house of Oldcastle rejoice with Leucopthalmos. God put it in heart of king to repair and beautify Dover Castle.
Let Beeson, house of Beeson rejoice with Pyropus, carbuncle opal. God be gracious to Masters of Yoke's Place.
Let Salmon, house of Salmon rejoice with Sapinos a kind of Amethyst.
Let Crutenden, house of Crutenden rejoice with Veneris Gemma a kind of amethyst.
Let Bridges, house of Bridges rejoice with Jasponyx, which is the Jasper-Onyx.
Let Lane, house of Lane rejoice with Myrmecias a precious stone with little knots in it.
Let Cope, house of Cope rejoice with Centipedes. God give me strength to cope with all my adversaries.
Let Sutton, house of Sutton rejoice with Cholos a gem of the Emerald kind.
Let Pelham, house of Pelham rejoice with Callimus in Taphiusio one stone in the body of another. God bless the Duke of Newcastle.
Let Holies, house of Holies rejoice with Pyriasis a black stone that burns by friction. The Lord kindle amongst Englishmen a sense of their name.
Let Lister, house of Lister rejoice with Craterites a very hard stone. The Lord hear my prayer even as I attend unto his commandments.
Let Ash, house of Ash rejoice with Callaica a green gem. God be gracious to Miss Leroche my fellow traveler from Calais.
Let Baily, house of Baily rejoice with Catopyrites of Cappadocia. God be gracious to the immortal soul of Lewes Baily author of the Practice of Piety.
Let Glover, house of Glover rejoice with Capnites a kind of Jasper -- blessed be the memory of Glover the martyr.
Let Egerton, house of Egerton rejoice with Sphragis green but not pellucid.
Let Reading, house of Reading rejoice with Synodontites found in the fish Synodontes. 27th July N.S. 1762 Lord Jesus have mercy on my soul.
Let Bolton, house of Bolton rejoice with Polygrammos, a kind of Jasper with white streaks.
Let Paulet, house of Paulet rejoice with Chalcites, a precious stone of the colour of Brass.
Let Stapleton, house of Stapleton rejoice with Scythis a precious stone -- the Lord rebuild the old houses of England.
Let Newdigate, house of Newdigate rejoice with Sandaserion a stone in India like Green Oil.
Let Knightly, house of Knightly rejoice with Zoronysios a gem supposed by the ancients to have magical effects. Star -- word -- herb -- gem.
Let Fellows, house of Fellows rejoice with Syrites a gem found in a Wolf's bladder.
Let Ascham, house of Ascham rejoice with Thyitis a precious stone remarkably hard. God be gracious to Bennet.
Let Mowbray, house of Mowbray rejoice with The Black and Blue Creeper a beautiful small bird of Brazil.
Let Aldrich, house of Aldrich rejoice with the Trincalo or Tricolor, a leaf without a flower or the flower of a leaf.
Let Culmer, house of Culmer rejoice with Phloginos a gem of a fire-colour.
Let Catesby, house of Catesby rejoice with Cerites a precious stone like wax.
Let Atterbury, house of Atterbury rejoice with Eurotias a black stone with the appearance of mould on it.
Let Hoare, house of Hoare rejoice with Crysopis a precious stone of a gold-colour. God be gracious to John Rust.
Let Fane, house of Fane rejoice with Chalcedonius Lapis a sort of onyx called a Chalcedony.
Let Lorman, house of Lorman rejoice with Cheramites, a sort of precious stone.
Let Flexney, house of Flexney rejoice with Triopthalmos -- God be gracious to Churchill, Loyd and especially to Sheels.
Let Gavel, house of Gavel rejoice with Phlogites a precious stone of a various flame-colour.
Let Hederick, house of Hederick rejoice with Pyritis a precious stone which held in the hand will burn it; this is fixed fire.
Let Pleasant, house of Pleasant rejoice with The Carrier Fish -- God be gracious to Dame Fysh.
Let Tayler, house of Tayler rejoice with the Flying Mole -- God keep him from the poor man's garden. God be gracious to William Tayler Sen and Junr.
Let Grieve, house of Grieve rejoice with Orites a precious stone perfectly round. Blessed be the name of the Man of Melancholy, for Jacob Grieve.
Let Bowes, house of Bowes rejoice with the Dog Fly. Lord have mercy upon me and support me in all my plagues and temptations.
Let Alberton, house of Alberton rejoice with Paneros a precious stone good against barrenness.
Let Morgan, house of Morgan rejoice with Prasius Lapis of a Leek-green colour.
Let Powell, house of Powell rejoice with Synochitis a precious stone abused by the ancient sorcerers.
Let Howell, house of Howell rejoice with Ostracias a gem like an oyster.
Let Close, house of Close rejoice with Chalcophonos a gem sounding like brass. O all ye gems of the mine bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever.
Let Johnson, house of Johnson rejoice with Omphalocarpa a kind of bur. God be gracious to Samuel Johnson.
Let Hopgood, house of Hopgood rejoice with Nepenthes an herb which infused in wine drives away sadness -- very likely.
Let Hopwood, house of Hopwood rejoice with Aspalathus the Rose of Jerusalem.
Let Benson, house of Benson rejoice with Sea-Ragwort or Powder'd Bean. Lord have mercy on the soul of Dr Benson Bsp. of Gloucester.
Let Marvel, house of Marvel rejoice with Brya a little shrub like birch.
Let Hull, house of Hull rejoice with Subis a bird called the Spight which breaks the Eagle's eggs.
Let Mason, house of Mason rejoice with Suberies the Capitol Cork Tree. Lord be merciful to William Mason.
Let Fountain, house of Fountain rejoice with Syriacus Rephanus a sweet kind of Radish.
Let Scroop, house of Scroop rejoice with Fig-Wine -- Palmi primarium vinum. Not so -- Palmi-primum is the word.
Let Hollingstead, house of Hollingstead rejoice with Sissitietaeris herb of good fellowship. Praise the name of the Lord September 1762.
Let Moyle, house of Moyle rejoice with Phlox a flame-colour'd flower without smell, tentanda via est. Via, veritas, vita sunt Christus.
Let Mount, house of Mount rejoice with Anthera a flowering herb. The Lord lift me up.
Let Dowers, house of Dowers rejoice with The American Nonpareil a beautiful small-bird.
Let Cudworth, house of Cudworth rejoice with the Indian Jaca Tree, which bears large clusters of fruit like apples.
Let Cuthbert, house of Cuthbert rejoice with Phyllandrian a good herb growing in marshes -- Lord have mercy on the soul of Cornelius Harrison.
Let Chillingworth, house of Chillingworth rejoice with Polygonoides an herb with leaves like laurel long and thick good against serpents.
Let Conworth, house of Conworth rejoice with Nenuphar a kind of Water Lily.
Let Ransom, house of Ransom rejoice with Isidos Plocamos a sea shrub of the Coral kind, or rather like Coral.
Let Ponder, house of Ponder rejoice with Polion an herb, whose leaves are white in the morning, purple at noon, and blue in the evening.
Let Woodward, house of Woodward rejoice with Nerium the Rose-Laurel -- God make the professorship of fossils in Cambridge a useful thing.
Let Spincks, house of Spinks rejoice with Struthiomela a little sort of Quinces -- The Lord Jesus pray for me.
Let Peacock, house of Peacock rejoice with Engalacton an herb good to breed milk.
Let Nason, house of Nason rejoice with Errhinum a medicine to clear the nose.
Let Bold, house of Bold rejoice with the Hop-Hornbeam. God send me a neighbour this September.
Let Spriggings, house of Spriggings rejoice with Eon the Tree of which Argo was built.
Let Bear, house of Bear rejoice with Gelotophyllis an herb which drank in wine and myrrh causes excess of laughter.
Let Sloper, house of Sloper rejoice with Gelotophye another laughing plant.
Let Tollfree, house of Tollfree rejoice with Fern of Trees -- Lord stave off evil this day.
Let Clare, house of Clare rejoice with Galeotes a kind of Lizard at enmity with serpents. Lord receive the soul of Dr Wilcox Master of Clare Hall.
Let Wilmot, house of Wilmot rejoice with Epipetros an herb coming up spontaneous (of the seed of the earth) but never flowers.
Let Anstey, house of Anstey rejoice with Eumeces a kind of balm. Lord have mercy on Christopher Anstey and his kinswoman.
Let Ruston, house of Ruston rejoice with Fulviana Herba, ab inventore good to provoke urine. Lord have mercy upon Roger Pratt and his family.
Let Atwood, house of Atwood rejoice with Rhodora with leaves like a nettle and flower like a rose. God bless all benefactors of Pembroke Hall.
Let Shield, house of Shield rejoice with Reseda herb dissolving swelling, and imposthumes.
Let Atkins, house of Atkins rejoice with Salicastrum Wild Wine upon willows and osiers.
Let Pearson, house of Pearson rejoice with the American Aloe. I pray for the soul of Frances Burton.
Let Hough, house of Hough rejoice with Pegasus The Flying Horse there be millions of them in the air. God bless the memories of Bsp. Hough and of Peter.
Let Evelyn, house of Evelyn rejoice with Phu a Plinian shrub sweet-scented. I pray God for trees enough in the posterities.
Let Wing, house of Wing rejoice with Phlomos a sort of Rush. I give the glory to God, thro Christ, for taking the Havannah. Septr 30th 1762.
Let Chace, house of Chace rejoice with Papyrus. God be gracious to Sr Richard and family.
Let Pulteney, house of Pulteney rejoice with Tragion a shrub like Juniper.
Let Abdy, house of Abdy rejoice with Ecbolia a medicine to fetch a dead child out of the womb. God give me to bless for Gulstone and Halford.
Let Hoadley, house of Hoadley rejoice with Dryos Hyphear which is the Oak-Missletoe.
Let Free, house of Free rejoice with Thya a kind of Wild Cypress.
Let Pink, house of Pink rejoice with Trigonum herb used in garlands -- the Lord succeed my pink borders.
Let Somner, house of Somner rejoice with the Blue Daisie -- God be gracious to my neighbour and his family this day, 7th Octr 1762.
Let Race, house of Race rejoice with Osiritis Dogshead. God be praised for the eighth of October 1762.
Let Trowell, house of Trowell rejoice with Teuchites kind of sweet rush.
Let Tilson, house of Tilson rejoice with Teramnos a kind of weed. Lord have mercy on the soul of Tilson, Fellow of Pembroke Hall.
Let Loom, house of Loom rejoice with Colocasia, an Egyptian Bean of whose leaves they made cups and pots.
Let Knock, house of Knock rejoice with Condurdon which bears red flowers in July and worn about the neck is good for scrophulous cases.
Let Case, house of Case rejoice with Coctanum a Syrian Fig. The Lord cure my cough.
Let Tomlyn, house of Tomlyn rejoice with Tetralyx a kind of herb.
Let Bason, house of Bason rejoice with Thelypteris which is Sea-Fern.
Let Joslyn, house of Joslyn rejoice with Cotonea a Venetian herb.
Let Mace, house of Mace rejoice with Adipsos a kind of Green Palm with the smell of a quince.
Let Potts, house of Potts rejoice with Ulex an herb like rosemary with a quality of attracting gold.
Let Bedingfield, house of Bedingfield rejoice with Zygia, which is a kind of maple.
Let Tough, house of Tough rejoice with Accipitrina. N.B. The hawk beat the raven St Luke's day 1762.
Let Balsam, house of Balsam rejoice with Chenomycon an herb the sight of which terrifies a goose. Lord have mercy on William Hunter his family.
Let Graves, house of Graves rejoice with Cinnaris the Stag's antidote -- the persecuted Christian is as the hunted stag.
Let Tombs, house of Tombs rejoice with Acesis Water Sage -- God be gracious to Christopher Charles Tombs.
Let Addy, house of Addy rejoice with Crysippea a kind of herb so called from the discoverer.
Let Jump, house of Jump rejoice with Zoster a Sea-Shrub. Blessed be the name of Christ for the Anniversary of the Battle of Agincourt 1762.
Let Bracegirdle, house of Bracegirdle rejoice with Xiris a kind of herb with sharp leaves.
Let Girdlestone, house of Girdlestone rejoice with Crysocarpum a kind of Ivy.
Let Homer, house of Homer rejoice with Cinnabar which makes a red colour.
Let Lenox, house of Lenox rejoice with Achnas the Wild Pear Tree. God be gracious to the Duke of Richmond.
Let Altham, house of Altham rejoice with the Everlasting Apple-Tree.
Let Travell, house of Travell rejoice with Ciborium The Egyptian Bean.
Let Tyers, house of Tyers rejoice with ??gilops a kind of bulbous root. God give good will to Jonathan Tyers and his family this day. All Saints. N.S. 1762.
Let Clever, house of Clever rejoice with Calathiana a sort of Autumnal flower.
Let Bones, house of Bones rejoice with The Red-Crested Black and Blue Bird of Surinam.
Let Pownall, house of Pownall rejoice with the Murrion a creature of the Beaver kind.
Let Fig, house of Fig rejoice with Fleawort. The Lord magnify the idea of Smart singing hymns on this day in the eyes of the whole University of Cambridge. Novr 5th 1762. N.S.
Let Codrington, house of Codrington rejoice with Thelyphonon an herb whose root kills scorpions.
Let Butler, house of Butler rejoice with Theombrotios a Persian herb. God be gracious to the immortal Soul of the Duke of Ormond.
Let Bodley, house of Bodley rejoice with Tetragnathius a creature of the Spider kind.
Let Acton, house of Acton rejoice with Theangelis an herb used by the Ancients for magical purposes.
Let Peckwater, house of Peckwater rejoice with Tettigonia a small kind of Grashopper.
Let Sheldon, house of Sheldon rejoice with Teucrion an herb like Germander.
Let Breckock, house of Brecknock rejoice with Thalassegle an herb. God be merciful to Timothy Brecknock.
Let Plank, house of Plank rejoice with the Sea Purslain -- God be gracious to Thomas Rosoman and family.
Let Goosetree, house of Goosetree rejoice with Hippophaes a kind of teazle used in the dressing of cloth. God exalt the Soul of Captain Goosetree.
Let Baimbridge, house of Baimbridge rejoice with Hippoph??stum of the same kind. Horses shou'd be dock'd in winter. -- Bambridge praise the name of the Lord.
Let Metcalf, house of Metcalf rejoice with Holcus Wall-Barley -- God give grace to my adversaries to ask council of Abel.
Let Graner, house of Graner rejoice with Hircules Bastard Nard. The Lord English Granier and his family.
Let Cape, house of Cape rejoice with Orgament an herb.
Let Oram, house of Oram rejoice with Halus an herb like unto Orgament.
Let Sykes, house of Skyes rejoice with Hadrobolum a kind of sweet gum.
Let Plumer, house of Plumer rejoice with Hastula Regia an herb resembling a spear.
Let Digby, house of Digby rejoice with Glycryhiza Sweetroot. God be gracious to Sr Digby Legard his Son and family.
Let Otway, house of Otway rejoice with Hippice an herb which being held in an horse's mouth keeps him from hunger.
Let Cecil, house of Cecil rejoice with Gnaphalium an herb bleached by nature white and soft for the purpose of flax. God bless Lord Salisbury.
Let Rogers, house of Rogers rejoice with Hypelates a kind of Laurel -- God be gracious to Rogers and Spilsbury with their families.
Let Cambden, house of Cambden rejoice with Glischromargos a kind of white marl.
Let Conduit, house of Conduit rejoice with Greecula a kind of Rose. God be gracious to the immortal soul of Sr Isaac Newton.
Let Hands, house of Hands rejoice with Hadrosphserum kind of Spikenard with broad leaves.
Let Snipe, house of Snipe rejoice with H??motimon a kind of red glass. Blessed be the name of Jesus for the 29th of Novr.
Let Aylesworth, house of Aylesworth rejoice with Glinon which is a kind of Maple.
Let Aisley, house of Aisley rejoice with Halicastrum which is a kind of bread corn.
Let Ready, house of Ready rejoice with Junco The Reed Sparrow. Blessed be the name of Christ Jesus Voice and Instrument.
Let Bland, house of Bland rejoice with Lacta a kind of Cassia. God be gracious to Bland of Durham and the Widow George.
Let Abington, house of Abington rejoice with Lea a kind of Colewort praise him upon the sound of the trumpet.
Let Adcock, house of Adcock rejoice with Lada a shrub, which has gummy leaves.
Let Snow, house of Snow rejoice with Hysginum a plant dying Scarlet.
Let Wardell, house of Wardell rejoice with Leiostreum a smooth oyster. God give grace to the black trumpeter and have mercy on the soul of Scipio.
Let Herring, house of Herring rejoice with Iberica a kind of herb. Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus for Miss Herring.
Let Dolben, house of Dolben rejoice with Irio Winter Cresses, Rock Gentle or Rock Gallant.
Let Oakley, house of Oakley rejoice with the Skink a little amphibious creature found upon Nile.
Let Owen, house of Owen rejoice with the Shag-green a beast from which the skin so called is taken.
Let Twist, house of Twist rejoice with Neottophora a little creature that carries its young upon its back.
Let Constant, house of Constant rejoice with the Musk-Goat -- I bless God for two visions of Anne Hope's being in charity with me.
Let Amos, house of Amos rejoice with The Avosetta a bird found at Rome.
Let Humphreys, house of Humphreys rejoice with The Beardmanica a curious bird.
Let Busby, house of Busby rejoice with The Ganser a bird. God prosper Westminster-School.
Let Alured, house of Alured rejoice with the Book-Spider -- I refer the people of both Universitys to the Bible for their morality.
Let Lidgate, house of Lidgate rejoice with The Flammant a curious large bird on the coast of Cuba. God make us amends for the restoration of the Havannah.
Let Cunningham, house of Cunningham rejoice with The Bohemian Jay. I pray for Peace between the K. of Prussia and Empress Queen.
Let Thornhill, house of Thornhill rejoice with The Albicore a Sea Bird. God be gracious to Hogarth his wife. Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus at Adgecomb.
Let Dawn, house of Dawn rejoice with The Frigate Bird which is found upon the coasts of India.
Let Horton, house of Horton rejoice with Birdlime -- Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus against the destruction of Small Birds.
Let Arne, house of Arne rejoice with The Jay of Bengal. God be gracious to Arne his wife to Michael and Charles Burney.
Let Westbrooke, house of Westbrooke rejoice with the Quail of Bengal. God be gracious to the people of Maidstone.
Let Allcock, house of Allcock rejoice with The King of the Wavows a strange fowl. I pray for the whose University of Cambridge especially Jesus College this blessed day.
Let Audley, house of Audley rejoice with The Green Crown Bird. The Lord help on with the hymns.
Let Bloom, house of Bloom rejoice with Hecatompus a fish with an hundred feet.
Let Beacon, house of Beacon rejoice with Amadavad a fine bird in the East Indies.
Let Blomer, house of Blomer rejoice with Halimus a Shrub to hedge with. Lord have mercy upon poor labourers this bitter frost Deer 29 N.S. 1762.
Let Merrick, house of Merrick rejoice with Lageus a kind of Grape. God all-sufficient bless and forward the Psalmist in the Lord Jesus.
Let Appleby, house of Appleby rejoice with Laburnum a shrub whose blossom is disliked by bees.
Let Waite, house of Waite rejoice with the Shittah-Tree -- blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus for the musicians and dancers this holiday-time.
Let Stedman, house of Stedman rejoice with Jacobasa St James's Wort. God be merciful to the house of Stuart.
Let Poet, house of Poet rejoice with Hedrychum a kind of ointment of a sweet smelling savour. God speed the New Year thro' Christ 1763.
Let Jesse, house of Jesse rejoice with the Lawrey a kind of bird. God forward my version of the psalms thro' Jesus Christ our Lord.
Let Clemison, house of Clemison rejoice with Helix a kind of Ivy. God be praised for the vision of the Redcap and packet.
Let Crockatt, house of Crockatt rejoice with Emboline an Asiatic Shrub with small leaves an antidote. I pray for the soul of Crockatt the bookseller the first to put me upon a version of the Psalms.
Let Oakley, house of Oakley rejoice with Haliphasus a tree with such bitter fruit that nothing but swine will touch it.
Let Preacher, house of Preacher rejoice with Helvella a small sort of cabbage. God be merciful to the immortal soul of Stephen Preacher.
Let Heron, house of Heron rejoice with the Tunal-Tree on which the Cochineal feeds.
Let Kitcat, house of Kitcat rejoice with Copec the Pitch-Stone. Janry 8th 1763 Hallelujah.
Let Gisbourne, house of Gisbourne rejoice with Isocinnamon an herb of a sweet smelling savour.
Let Poor, house of Poor rejoice with Jasione a kind of Withwind -- Lord have mercy on the poor this hard weather. Jan: 10th 1763.
Let Eccles, house of Eccles rejoice with Heptapleuros a kind of Plantain. I pray for a musician or musicians to set the new psalms.
Let Moseley, house of Moseley rejoice with Spruce -- I bless God for Old Foundation Day at Pemb. Hall.
Let Pass, house of Pass rejoice with Salt -- The Lord pass the last year's accounts in my conscience thro' the merits of Jesus Christ. New Year by Old Stile 1763.
Let Forward, house of Forward rejoice with Immussulus a kind of bird -- the Lord forward my translation of the psalms this year.
Let Quarme, house of Quarme rejoice with Thyosiris yellow Succory -- I pray God bless all my Subscribers.
Let Larkin, house of Larkin rejoice with Long-wort or Torch-herb -- God give me good riddance of my present grievances.
Let Halford, house of Halford rejoice with Siren a musical bird. God considered thou me for the baseness of those I have served very highly.
Let Ayerst, house of Ayerst rejoice with the Wild Beet -- God be gracious to Smith, Cousins, Austin, Cam and Kingsley and Kinleside.
Let Decker, house of Decker rejoice with Sirpe a Cyrenian plant yielding an odoriferous juice.
Let Cust, house of Cust rejoice with Margaris a date like unto a pearl.
Let Usher, house of Usher rejoice with Condurdon an herb with a red flower worn about the neck for the scurvy.
Let Slingsby, house of Slingsby rejoice with Midas a little worm breeding in beans.
Let Farmer, house of Farmer rejoice with Merois an herb growing at Meroe leaf like lettuce and good for dropsy.
Let Affleck, house of Affleck rejoice with The Box-thorn. Blessed be the name of the Lord Jesus Emanuel.
Let Arnold, house of Arnold rejoice with Leucographis a simple good against spitting of blood.
Let Morris, house of Morris rejoice with Lepidium a Simple of the Cress kind.
Let Crane, house of Crane rejoice with Libanotis an herb that smells like Frankinsense.
Let Arden, house of Arden rejoice with Mew an herb with the stalk and leaves like Anise.
Let Joram, house of Joram rejoice with Meliphylla Balm Gentle God be gracious to John Sherrat.
Let Odwell, house of Odwell rejoice with Lappago Maiden Lips. Blessed be the name of Jesus in singularities and singular mercies.
Let Odney, house of Odney rejoice with Canaria a simple called Hound's-grass.
For I will consider my Cat Jeoffry.
For he is the servant of the Living God duly and daily serving him.
For at the first glance of the glory of God in the East he worships in his way.
For this is done by wreathing his body seven times round with elegant quickness.
For then he leaps up to catch the musk, which is the blessing of God upon his prayer.
For he rolls upon prank to work it in.
For having done duty and received blessing he begins to consider himself.
For this he performs in ten degrees.
For first he looks upon his forepaws to see if they are clean.
For secondly he kicks up behind to clear away there.
For thirdly he works it upon stretch with the forepaws extended.
For fourthly he sharpens his paws by wood.
For fifthly he washes himself.
For sixthly he rolls upon wash.
For seventhly he fleas himself, that he may not be interrupted upon the beat.
For eighthly he rubs himself against a post.
For ninthly he looks up for his instructions.
For tenthly he goes in quest of food.
For having consider'd God and himself he will consider his neighbour.
For if he meets another cat he will kiss her in kindness.
For when he takes his prey he plays with it to give it a chance.
For one mouse in seven escapes by his dallying.
For when his day's work is done his business more properly begins.
For he keeps the Lord's watch in the night against the adversary.
For he counteracts the powers of darkness by his electrical skin and glaring eyes.
For he counteracts the Devil, who is death, by brisking about the life.
For in his morning orisons he loves the sun and the sun loves him.
For he is of the tribe of Tiger.
For the Cherub Cat is a term of the Angel Tiger.
For he has the subtlety and hissing of a serpent, which in goodness he suppresses.
For he will not do destruction, if he is well-fed, neither will he spit without provocation.
For he purrs in thankfulness, when God tells him he's a good Cat.
For he is an instrument for the children to learn benevolence upon.
For every house is incomplete without him and a blessing is lacking in the spirit.
For the Lord commanded Moses concerning the cats at the departure of the Children of Israel from Egypt.
For every family had one cat at least in the bag.
For the English Cats are the best in Europe.
For he is the cleanest in the use of his forepaws of any quadruped.
For the dexterity of his defence is an instance of the love of God to him exceedingly.
For he is the quickest to his mark of any creature.
For he is tenacious of his point.
For he is a mixture of gravity and waggery.
For he knows that God is his Saviour.
For there is nothing sweeter than his peace when at rest.
For there is nothing brisker than his life when in motion.
For he is of the Lord's poor and so indeed is he called by benevolence perpetually--Poor Jeoffry! poor Jeoffry! the rat has bit thy throat.
For I bless the name of the Lord Jesus that Jeoffry is better.
For the divine spirit comes about his body to sustain it in complete cat.
For his tongue is exceeding pure so that it has in purity what it wants in music.
For he is docile and can learn certain things.
For he can set up with gravity which is patience upon approbation.
For he can fetch and carry, which is patience in employment.
For he can jump over a stick which is patience upon proof positive.
For he can spraggle upon waggle at the word of command.
For he can jump from an eminence into his master's bosom.
For he can catch the cork and toss it again.
For he is hated by the hypocrite and miser.
For the former is afraid of detection.
For the latter refuses the charge.
For he camels his back to bear the first notion of business.
For he is good to think on, if a man would express himself neatly.
For he made a great figure in Egypt for his signal services.
For he killed the Ichneumon-rat very pernicious by land.
For his ears are so acute that they sting again.
For from this proceeds the passing quickness of his attention.
For by stroking of him I have found out electricity.
For I perceived God's light about him both wax and fire.
For the Electrical fire is the spiritual substance, which God sends from heaven to sustain the bodies both of man and beast.
For God has blessed him in the variety of his movements.
For, tho he cannot fly, he is an excellent clamberer.
For his motions upon the face of the earth are more than any other quadruped.
For he can tread to all the measures upon the music.
For he can swim for life.
For he can creep.
For God has given us a language of monosyllables to prevent our clipping.
For a toad enjoys a finer prospect than another creature to compensate his lack.
Tho' toad I am the object of man's hate.
Yet better am I than a reprobate. who has the worst of prospects.
For there are stones, whose constituent particles are little toads.
For the spiritual musick is as follows.
For there is the thunder-stop, which is the voice of God direct.
For the rest of the stops are by their rhimes.
For the trumpet rhimes are sound bound, soar more and the like.
For the Shawm rhimes are lawn fawn moon boon and the like.
For the harp rhimes are sing ring string and the like.
For the cymbal rhimes are bell well toll soul and the like.
For the flute rhimes are tooth youth suit mute and the like.
For the dulcimer rhimes are grace place beat heat and the like.
For the Clarinet rhimes are clean seen and the like.
For the Bassoon rhimes are pass, class and the like. God be gracious to Baumgarden.
For the dulcimer are rather van fan and the like and grace place &c are of the bassoon.
For beat heat, weep peep &c are of the pipe.
For every word has its marrow in the English tongue for order and for delight.
For the dissyllables such as able table &c are the fiddle rhimes.
For all dissyllables and some trissyllables are fiddle rhimes.
For the relations of words are in pairs first.
For the relations of words are sometimes in oppositions.
For the relations of words are according to their distances from the pair.
For there be twelve cardinal virtues the gifts of the twelve sons of Jacob.
For Reuben is Great. God be gracious to Lord Falmouth.
For Simeon is Valiant. God be gracious to the Duke of Somerset.
For Levi is Pious. God be gracious to the Bishop of London.
For Judah is Good. God be gracious to Lord Granville.
For Dan is Clean -- neat, dextrous, apt, active, compact. God be gracious to Draper.
For Naphtali is sublime -- God be gracious to Chesterfield.
For Gad is Contemplative -- God be gracious to Lord Northampton.
For Ashur is Happy -- God be gracious to George Bowes.
For Issachar is strong -- God be gracious to the Duke of Dorsett.
For Zabulon is Constant -- God be gracious to Lord Bath.
For Joseph is Pleasant -- God be gracious to Lord Bolingbroke.
For Benjamin is Wise -- God be gracious to Honeywood.
For all Foundation is from God depending.
For the two Universities are the Eyes of England.
For Cambridge is the right and the brightest.
For Pembroke Hall was founded more in the Lord than any College in Cambridge.
For mustard is the proper food of birds and men are bound to cultivate it for their use.
For they that study the works of God are peculiarly assisted by his Spirit.
For all the creatures mentiond by Pliny are somewhere or other extant to the glory of God.
For Rye is food rather for fowls than men.
For Rye-bread is not taken with thankfulness.
For the lack of Rye may be supplied by Spelt.
For languages work into one another by their bearings.
For the power of some animal is predominant in every language.
For the power and spirit of a CAT is in the Greek.
For the sound of a cat is in the most useful preposition ??????' ?????????? .
For the pleasantry of a cat at pranks is in the language ten thousand times over.
For JACK UPON PRANCK is in the performance of g?????? together or seperate.
For Clapperclaw is in the grappling of the words upon one another in all the modes of versification.
For the sleekness of a Cat is in his ???????????????? .
For the Greek is thrown from heaven and falls upon its feet.
For the Greek when distracted from the line is sooner restored to rank and rallied into some form than any other.
For the purring of a Cat is his ???????????? .
For his cry is in ???????? , which I am sorry for.
For the Mouse (Mus) prevails in the Latin.
For Edi-mus, bibi-mus, vivi-mus -- ore-mus.
For the Mouse is a creature of great personal valour.
For -- this is a true case -- Cat takes female mouse from the company of male -- male mouse will not depart, but stands threatning and daring.
For this is as much as to challenge, if you will let her go, I will engage you, as prodigious a creature as you are.
For the Mouse is of an hospitable disposition.
For bravery and hospitality were said and done by the Romans rather than others.
For two creatures the Bull and the Dog prevail in the English.
For all the words ending in ble are in the creature. Invisi-ble, Incomprehensi-ble, ineffa-ble, A-ble.
For the Greek and Latin are not dead languages, but taken up and accepted for the sake of him that spake them.
For can is (canis) is cause and effect a dog.
For the English is concise and strong. Dog and Bull again.
For Newton's notion of colours is ???????????? unphilosophical.
For the colours are spiritual.
For WHITE is the first and the best.
For there are many intermediate colours, before you come to SILVER.
For the next colour is a lively GREY.
For the next colour is BLUE.
For the next is GREEN of which there are ten thousand distinct sorts.
For the next is YELLOW which is more excellent than red, tho Newton makes red the prime. God be gracious to John Delap.
For RED is the next working round the Orange.
For Red is of sundry sorts till it deepens to BLACK.
For black blooms and it is PURPLE.
For purple works off to BROWN which is of ten thousand acceptable shades.
For the next is PALE. God be gracious to William Whitehead.
For pale works about to White again.
NOW that colour is spiritual appears inasmuch as the blessing of God upon all things descends in colour.
For the blessing of health upon the human face is in colour.
For the blessing of God upon purity is in the Virgin's blushes.
For the blessing of God in colour is on him that keeps his virgin.
For I saw a blush in Staindrop Church, which was of God's own colouring.
For it was the benevolence of a virgin shewn to me before the whole congregation.
For the blessing of God upon the grass is in shades of Green visible to a nice observer as they light upon the surface of the earth.
For the blessing of God unto perfection in all bloom and fruit is by colouring.
For from hence something in the spirit may be taken off by painters.
For Painting is a species of idolatry, tho' not so gross as statuary.
For it is not good to look with earning upon any dead work.
For by so doing something is lost in the spirit and given from life to death.
For BULL in the first place is the word of Almighty God.
For he is a creature of infinite magnitude in the height.
For there is the model of every beast of the field in the height.
For they are blessed intelligences and all angels of the living God.
For there are many words under Bull.
For Bul the Month is under it.
For Sea is under Bull.
For Brook is under Bull. God be gracious to Lord Bolingbroke.
For Rock is under Bull.
For Bullfinch is under Bull. God be gracious to the Duke of Cleveland.
For God, which always keeps his work in view has paited a Bullfinch in the heart of a stone. God be gracious to Gosling and Canterbury.
For the Bluecap is under Bull.
For the Humming Bird is under Bull.
For Beetle is under Bull.
For Toad is under bull.
For Frog is under Bull, which he has a delight to look at.
For the Pheasant-eyed Pink is under Bull. Blessed Jesus R4NK EL.
For Bugloss is under Bull.
For Bugle is under Bull.
For Oxeye is under Bull.
For Fire is under Bull.
For I will consider my Cat Jeoffry.
For he is the servant of the Living God duly and daily serving him.
For at the first glance of the glory of God in the East he worships in his way.
For is this done by wreathing his body seven times round with elegant quickness.
For then he leaps up to catch the musk, which is the blessing of God upon his prayer.
For he rolls upon prank to work it in.
For having done duty and received blessing he begins to consider himself.
For this he performs in ten degrees.
For first he looks upon his fore-paws to see if they are clean.
For secondly he kicks up behind to clear away there.
For thirdly he works it upon stretch with the fore paws extended.
For fourthly he sharpens his paws by wood.
For fifthly he washes himself.
For Sixthly he rolls upon wash.
For Seventhly he fleas himself, that he may not be interrupted upon the beat.
For Eighthly he rubs himself against a post.
For Ninthly he looks up for his instructions.
For Tenthly he goes in quest of food.
For having consider'd God and himself he will consider his neighbour.
For if he meets another cat he will kiss her in kindness.
For when he takes his prey he plays with it to give it chance.
For one mouse in seven escapes by his dallying.
For when his day's work is done his business more properly begins.
For he keeps the Lord's watch in the night against the adversary.
For he counteracts the powers of darkness by his electrical skin and glaring eyes.
For he counteracts the Devil, who is death, by brisking about the life
For in his morning orisons he loves the sun and the sun loves him.
For he is of the tribe of Tiger.
For the Cherub Cat is a term of the Angel Tiger.
For he has the subtlety and hissing of a serpent, which in goodness he suppresses.
For he will not do destruction, if he is well-fed, neither will he spit without provocation.
For he purrs in thankfulness, when God tells him he's a good Cat.
For he is an instrument for the children to learn benevolence upon.
For every house is incompleat without him and a blessing is lacking in the spirit.
For the Lord commanded Moses concerning the cats at the departure of the Children of Israel from Egypt.
For every family had one cat at least in the bag.
For the English Cats are the best in Europe.
For he is the cleanest in the use of his fore-paws of any quadrupede.
For the dexterity of his defence is an instance of the love of God to him exceedingly.
For he is the quickest to his mark of any creature.
For he is tenacious of his point.
For he is a mixture of gravity and waggery.
For he knows that God is his Saviour.
For there is nothing sweeter than his peace when at rest.
For there is nothing brisker than his life when in motion.
For he is of the Lord's poor and so indeed is he called by benevolence perpetually -- Poor Jeoffry! poor Jeoffry! the rat has bit thy throat.
For I bless the name of the Lord Jesus that Jeoffry is better.
For the divine spirit comes about his body to sustain it in compleat cat.
For his tongue is exceeding pure so that it has in purity what it wants in musick.
For he is docile and can learn certain things.
For he can set up with gravity which is patience upon approbation.
For he can fetch and carry, which is patience in employment.
For he can jump over a stick which is patience upon proof positive.
For he can spraggle upon waggle at the word of command.
For he can jump from an eminence into his master's bosom.
For he can catch the cork and toss it again.
For he is hated by the hypocrite and miser.
For the former is affraid of detection.
For the latter refuses the charge.
For he camels his back to bear the first notion of business.
For he is good to think on, if a man would express himself neatly.
For he made a great figure in Egypt for his signal services.
For he killed the Icneumon-rat very pernicious by land.
For his ears are so acute that they sting again.
For from this proceeds the passing quickness of his attention.
For by stroaking of him I have found out electricity.
For I perceived God's light about him both wax and fire.
For the Electrical fire is the spiritual substance, which God sends from heaven to sustain the bodies both of man and beast.
For God has blessed him in the variety of his movements.
For, tho he cannot fly, he is an excellent clamberer.
For his motions upon the face of the earth are more than any other quadrupede.
For he can tread to all the measures upon the musick.
For he can swim for life.
For he can creep.
For a Man is to be looked upon in that which he excells as on a prospect.
For there be twelve cardinal virtues -- three to the East -- Greatness, Valour, Piety.
For there be three to the West -- Goodness, Purity and Sublimity.
For there be three to the North -- Meditation, Happiness, Strength.
For there be three to the South -- Constancy, Pleasantry and Wisdom.
For the Argument A PRIORI is GOD in every man's CONSCIENCE.
For the Argument A POSTERIORI is God before every man's eyes.
For the Four and Twenty Elders of the Revelation are Four and Twenty Eternities.
For their Four and Twenty Crowns are their respective Consummations.
For a CHARACTER is the votes of the Worldlings, but the seal is of Almighty GOD alone.
For there is no musick in flats and sharps which are not in God's natural key.
For where Accusation takes the place of encouragement a man of Genius is driven to act the vices of a fool.
For the Devil can set a house on fire, when the inhabitants find combustibles.
For the old account of time is the true -- Decr 28th 1759-60 -- -- --
For Faith as a grain of mustard seed is to believe, as I do, that an Eternity is such in respect to the power and magnitude of Almighty God.
For a DREAM is a good thing from GOD.
For there is a dream from the adversary which is terror.
For the phenomenon of dreaming is not of one solution, but many.
For Eternity is like a grain of mustard as a growing body and improving spirit.
For the malignancy of fire is oweing to the Devil's hiding of light, till it became visible darkness.
For the Circle may be SQUARED by swelling and flattening.
For the Life of God is in the body of man and his spirit in the Soul.
For there was no rain in Paradise because of the delicate construction of the spiritual herbs and flowers.
For the Planet Mercury is the WORD DISCERNMENT.
For the Scotchman seeks for truth at the bottom of a well, the Englishman in the Heavn of Heavens.
For the Planet Venus is the WORD PRUDENCE or providence.
For GOD nevertheless is an extravagant BEING and generous unto loss.
For there is no profit in the generation of man and the loss of millions is not worth God's tear.
For this is the twelfth day of the MILLENNIUM of the MILLENNIUM foretold by the prophets -- give the glory to God ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY --
For the Planet Mars is the word FORTITUDE.
For to worship naked in the Rain is the bravest thing for the refreshing and purifying the body.
For the Planet Jupiter is the WORD DISPENSATION.
For Tully says to be generous you must be first just, but the voice of Christ is distribute at all events.
For Kittim is the father of the Pygmies, God be gracious to Pigg his family.
For the Soul is divisible and a portion of the Spirit may be cut off from one and applied to another.
For NEW BREAD is the most wholesome especially if it be leaven'd with honey.
For a NEW SONG also is best, if it be to the glory of God; and taken with the food like the psalms.
For the Planet Saturn is the word TEMPERANCE or PATIENCE.
For Jacob's Ladder are the steps of the Earth graduated hence to Paradice and thence to the throne of God.
For a good wish is well but a faithful prayer is an eternal benefit.
For SPICA VIRGINIS is the star that appeared to the wise men in the East and directed their way before it was yet insphered.
For an IDEA is the mental vision of an object.
For Lock supposes that an human creature, at a given time may be an atheist i.e. without God, by the folly of his doctrine concerning innate ideas.
For it is not lawful to sell poyson in England any more than it is in Venice, the Lord restrain both the finder and receiver.
For the ACCENTS are the invention of the Moabites, who learning the GREEK tongue marked the words after their own vicious pronuntiation.
For the GAULS (the now-French and original Moabites) after they were subdued by C??sar became such Grecians at Rome.
For the Gaullic manuscripts fell into the hands of the inventors of printing.
For all the inventions of man, which are good, are the communications of Almighty God.
For all the stars have satellites, which are terms under their respective words.
For tiger is a word and his satellites are Griffin, Storgis, Cat and others.
For my talent is to give an Impression upon words by punching, that when the reader casts his eye upon 'em, he takes up the image from the mould which I have made.
For JOB was the son of Issachar and patience is the child of strength.
For the Names of the DAYS, as they now stand, are foolish and abominable.
For the Days are the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh.
For the names of the months are false -- the Hebrew appellatives are of God.
For the Time of the Lord's temptation was in early youth and imminent danger.
For an equivocal generation is a generation and no generation.
For putrifying matter nevertheless will yield up its life in diverse creatures and combinations of creatures.
For a TOAD can dwell in the centre of a stone, because -- there are stones whose constituent life is of those creatures.
For a Toad hath by means of his eye the most beautiful prospects of any other animal to make him amends for his distance from his Creator in Glory.
For FAT is the fruit of benevolence, therefore it was the Lord's in the Mosaic sacrifices.
For the very particular laws of Moses are the determinations of CASES that fell under his cognizance.
For the Devil can make the shadow thicker by candlelight by reason of his pow'r over malignant fire.
For the Romans clipped their words in the Augustan thro idleness and effeminacy and paid foreign actors for speaking them out.
For when the weight and the pow'r are equivalent the prop is of none effect.
For shaving of the beard was an invention of the people of Sodom to make men look like women.
For the ends of the world are the accomplishment of great events, and the consummation of periods.
For ignorance is a sin because illumination is to be obtained by prayer.
For Preferment is not from the East, West or South, but from the North, where Satan has most power.
For the ministers of the Devil set the hewer of wood over the head of God's free Man.
For this inverting God's good order, edifice and edification, and appointing place, where the Lord has not appointed.
For the Ethiopian question is already solved in that the Blacks are the children of Cain.
For the phenomenon of the horizontal moon is the truth -- she appears bigger in the horizon because she actually is so.
For it was said of old 'can the Ethiopian change his skin?' the Lord has answered the question by his merit and death he shall. --
For the moon is magnified in the horizon by Almighty God, and so is the Sun.
For she has done her day's-work and the blessing of God upon her, and she communicates with the earth.
For when she rises she has been strength'ned by the Sun, who cherishes her by night.
For man is born to trouble in the body, as the sparks fly upwards in the spirit.
For man is between the pinchers while his soul is shaping and purifying.
For the ENGLISH are the seed of Abraham and work up to him by Joab, David, and Naphtali. God be gracious to us this day. General Fast March 14th 1760.
For the Romans and the English are one people the children of the brave man who died at the altar praying for his posterity, whose death was the type of our Saviour's.
For the WELCH are the children of Mephibosheth and Ziba with a mixture of David in the Jones's.
For the Scotch are the children of Doeg with a mixture of Cush the Benjamite, whence their innate antipathy to the English.
For the IRISH are the children of Shimei and Cush with a mixture of something lower -- the Lord raise them!
For the FRENCH are Moabites even the children of Lot.
For the DUTCH are the children of Gog.
For the Poles are the children of Magog.
For the Italians are the children of Samuel and are the same as the Grecians.
For the Spaniards are the children of Abishai Joab's brother, hence is the goodwill between the two nations.
For the Portuguese are the children of Amman -- God be gracious to Lisbon and send good angels amongst them!
For the Hottentots are the children of Gog with a Black mixture.
For the Russians are the Children of Ishmael.
For the Turks are the children of Esaw, which is Edom.
For the Wallachians are the children of Huz. God be gracious to Elizabeth Hughes, as she was.
For the Germans are the children of the Philistins even the seed of Anak.
For the Prussians are the children of Goliah -- but the present, whom God bless this hour, is a Campbell of the seed of Phinees.
For the Hanoverians are Hittites of the seed of Uriah. God save the king.
For the Hessians are Philistines with a mixture of Judah.
For the Saxons are Benjamites, men of great subtlety and Marshal Saxe was direct from Benjamin.
For the Danes are of the children of Zabulon.
For the Venetians are the children of Mark and Romans.
For the Swiss are Philistins of a particular family. God be gracious to Jonathan Tyers his family and to all the people at Vaux Hall.
For the Sardinians are of the seed of David -- The Lord forward the Reformation amongst the good seed first. --
For the Mogul's people are the children of Phut.
For the Old Greeks and the Italians are one people, which are blessed in the gift of Mustek by reason of the song of Hannah and the care of Samuel with regard to divine melody.
For the Germans and the Dutch are the children of the Goths and Vandals who did a good in destruction books written by heathen Free-Thinkers against God.
For there are Americans of the children of Toi. --
For the Laplanders are the children of Gomer.
For the Phenomena of the Diving Bell are solved right in the schools.
For NEW BREAD is the most wholesome -- God be gracious to Baker.
For the English are the children of Joab, Captain of the host of Israel, who was the greatest man in the world to GIVE and to ATCHIEVE.
For TEA is a blessed plant and of excellent virtue. God give the Physicians more skill and honesty!
For nutmeg is exceeding wholesome and cherishing, neither does it hurt the liver.
For The Lightning before death is God's illumination in the spirit for preparation and for warning.
For Lavender Cotton is exceeding good for the teeth. God be gracious to Windsmore.
For the Fern is exceeding good and pleasant to rub the teeth.
For a strong preparation of Mandragora is good for the gout.
For the Bark was a communication from God and is sovereign.
For the method of curing an ague by terror is exaction.
For Exaction is the most accursed of all things, because it brought the Lord to the cross, his betrayers and murderers being such from their exaction.
For an Ague is the terror of the body, when the blessing of God is withheld for a season.
For benevolence is the best remedy in the first place and the bark in the second.
For, when the nation is at war, it is better to abstain from the punishment of criminals especially, every act of human vengeance being a check to the grace of God.
For the letter ?? [Hebrew character lamed] which signifies GOD by himself is on the fibre of some leaf in every Tree.
For ?? is the grain of the human heart and on the network of the skin.
For ?? is in the veins of all stones both precious and common.
For ?? is upon every hair both of man and beast.
For ?? is in the grain of wood.
For ?? is in the ore of all metals.
For ?? is on the scales of all fish.
For ?? is on the petals of all flowers.
For ?? is upon on all shells.
For ?? is in the constituent particles of air.
For ?? is on the mite of the earth.
For ?? is in the water yea in every drop.
For ?? is in the incomprehensible ingredients of fire.
For ?? is in the stars the sun and in the Moon.
For ?? is upon the Sapphire Vault.
For the doubling of flowers is the improvement of the gardners talent.
For the flowers are great blessings.
For the Lord made a Nosegay in the meadow with his disciples and preached upon the lily.
For the angels of God took it out of his hand and carried it to the Height.
For a man cannot have publick spirit, who is void of private benevolence.
For there is no Height in which there are not flowers.
For flowers have great virtues for all the senses.
For the flower glorifies God and the root parries the adversary.
For the flowers have their angels even the words of God's Creation.
For the warp and woof of flowers are worked by perpetual moving spirits.
For flowers are good both for the living and the dead.
For there is a language of flowers.
For there is a sound reasoning upon all flowers.
For elegant phrases are nothing but flowers.
For flowers are peculiarly the poetry of Christ.
For flowers are medicinal.
For flowers are musical in ocular harmony.
For the right names of flowers are yet in heaven. God make gard'ners better nomenclators.
For the Poorman's nosegay is an introduction to a Prince.
For it were better for the SERVICE, if only select psalms were read.
For the Lamentations of Jeremiah, Songs from other scriptures, and parts of Esdras might be taken to supply the quantity.
For A is the beginning of learning and the door of heaven.
For B is a creature busy and bustling.
For C is a sense quick and penetrating.
For D is depth.
For E is eternity -- such is the power of the English letters taken singly.
For F is faith.
For G is God -- whom I pray to be gracious to Liveware my fellow prisoner.
For H is not a letter, but a spirit -- Benedicatur Jesus Christus, sic spirem!
For I is identity. God be gracious to Henry Hatsell.
For K is king.
For L is love. God in every language.
For M is musick and Hebrew ?? [Hebrew character mem] is the direct figure of God's harp.
For N is new.
For O is open.
For P is power.
For Q is quick.
For R is right.
For S is soul.
For T is truth. God be gracious to Jermyn Pratt and to Harriote his Sister.
For U is unity, and his right name is Uve to work it double.
For W is word.
For X [drawn as a backwards G and a G stuck together] is hope -- consisting of two check G -- God be gracious to Anne Hope.
For Y is yea. God be gracious to Eennet and his family!
For Z is zeal.
For in the education of children it is necessary to watch the words, -which they pronounce with difficulty, for such are against them in their consequences.
For A is awe, if pronounced full. Stand in awe and sin not.
For B pronounced in the animal is bey importing authority.
For C pronounced hard is ke importing to shut.
For D pronounced full is day.
For E is east particularly when formed little e with his eye.
For F in it's secondary meaning is fair.
For G in a secondary sense is good.
For H is heave.
For I is the organ of vision.
For K is keep.
For L is light, and ?? [Hebrew character lamed] is the line of beauty.
For M is meet.
For N is nay.
For O is over.
For P is peace.
For Q is quarter.
For R is rain, or thus reign, or thus rein.
For S is save.
For T is take.
For V is veil.
For W is world.
For X [drawn as a backwards G and a G stuck together] beginneth not, but connects and continues.
For Y is young -- the Lord direct me in the better way of going on in the Fifth year of my jeopardy June the 17th N.S. 1760. God be gracious to Dr YOUNG.
For Z is zest. God give us all a relish of our duty.
For Action and Speaking are one according to God and the Ancients.
For the approaches of Death are by illumination.
For a man cannot have Publick Spirit, who is void of private benevolence.
For the order of Alamoth is first three, second six, third eighteen, fourth fifty four, and then the whole band.
For the order of Sheminith is first ten, second twenty, third thirty and then the whole band.
For the first entrance into Heaven is by complement.
For Flowers can see, and Pope's Carnations knew him.
For the devil works upon damps and lowth and causes agues.
For Ignorance is a sin, because illumination is to be had by prayer.
For many a genius being lost at the plough is a false thought -- the divine providence is a better manager.
For a man's idleness is the fruit of the adversary's diligence.
For diligence is the gift of God, as well as other good things.
For it is a good NOTHING in one's own eyes and in the eyes of fools.
For ??ra in its primitive sense is but a weed amongst corn.
For there is no knowing of times and seasons, in submitting them to God stands the Christian's Chronology.
For Jacob's brown sheep wore the Golden fleece.
For Shaving of the face was the invention of the Sodomites to make men look like women.
I
O THOU, that sit'st upon a throne,
With harp of high majestic tone,
To praise the King of kings;
And voice of heav'n-ascending swell,
Which, while its deeper notes excell,
Clear, as a clarion, rings:
 II
To bless each valley, grove and coast,
And charm the cherubs to the post
Of gratitude in throngs;
To keep the days on Zion's mount,
And send the year to his account,
With dances and with songs:
 III
O Servant of God's holiest charge,
The minister of praise at large,
Which thou may'st now receive;
From thy blest mansion hail and hear,
From topmost eminence appear
To this the wreath I weave.
 IV
Great, valiant, pious, good, and clean,
Sublime, contemplative, serene,
Strong, constant, pleasant, wise!
Bright effluence of exceeding grace;
Best man!???the swiftest and the race,
The peril, and the prize!
 V
Great???from the lustre of his crown,
From Samuel's horn, and God's renown,
Which is the people's voice;
For all the host, from rear to van,
Applauded and embrac'd the man???
The man of God's own choice.
 VI
Valiant???the word, and up he rose;
The fight???he triumph'd o'er the foes,
Whom God's just laws abhor;
And, arm'd in gallant faith, he took
Against the boaster, from the brook,
The weapons of the war.
 VII
Pious???magnificent and grand;
'Twas he the famous temple plann'd;
(The seraph in his soul:)
Foremost to give his Lord His dues,
Foremost to bless the welcome news,
And foremost to condole.
 VIII
Good???from Jehudah's genuine vein,
From God's best nature good in grain,
His aspect and his heart;
To pity, to forgive, to save,
Witness En-gedi's conscious cave,
And Shimei's blunted dart.
 IX
Clean???if perpetual prayer be pure,
And love, which could itself inure
To fasting and to fear???
Clean in his gestures, hands, and feet,
To smite the lyre, the dance complete,
To play the sword and spear.
 X
Sublime???invention ever young,
Of vast conception, tow'ring tongue,
To God th'eternal theme;
Notes from yon exaltations caught,
Unrival'd royalty of thought,
O'er meaner strains supreme.
 XI
Contemplative???on God to fix
His musings, and above the six
The Sabbath-day he blest;
'Twas then his thoughts self-conquest prun'd,
And heav'nly melancholy tun'd,
To bless and bear the rest.
 XII
Serene???to sow the seeds of peace,
Rememb'ring, when he watch'd the fleece,
How sweetly Kidron purl'd???
To further knowledge, silence vice,
And plant plant perpetual paradise,
When God had calm'd the world.
 XIII
Strong???in the Lord, Who could defy
Satan, and all his pow'rs that lie
In sempiternal night;
And hell, and horror, and despair
Were as the lion and the bear
To his undaunted might.
 XIV
Constant???in love to God, THE TRUTH,
Age, manhood, infancy, and youth???
To Jonathan his friend
Constant, beyond the verge of death;
And Zilba, and Mephibosheth,
His endless fame attend.
 XV
Pleasant???various as the year;
Man, soul, and angel, without peer,
Priest, champion, sage, and boy;
In armor, or in ephod clad,
His pomp, his piety was glad;
Majestic was his joy.
 XVI
Wise???in recovery from his fall,
Whence rose his eminence o'er all,
Of all the most revil'd;
The light of Israel in his ways,
Wise are his precepts, prayer and praise,
And counsel to his child.
 XVII
His muse, bright angel of his verse,
Gives balm for all the thorns that pierce,
For all the pangs that rage;
Blest light, still gaining on the gloom,
The more than Michal of his bloom,
Th'Abishag of his age.
 XVIII
He sung of God???the mighty source
Of all things???the stupendous force
On which all strength depends;
From Whose right arm, beneath Whose eyes,
All period, pow'r, and enterprise
Commences, reigns, and ends.
 XIX
Angels???their ministry and meed,
Which to and fro with blessings speed,
Or with their citherns wait;
Where Michael with his millions bows,
Where dwells the seraph and his spouse
The cherub and her mate.
 XX
O David, scholar of the Lord!
Of God and Love???the Saint elect
For infinite applause???
To rule the land, and briny broad,
To be laborious in His laud,
And heroes in His cause.
 XXI
The world???the clust'ring spheres He made,
The glorious light, the soothing shade,
Dale, champaign, grove, and hill;
The multitudinous abyss,
Where secrecy remains in bliss,
And wisdom hides her skill
 XXII
Trees, plants, and flow'rs???of virtuous root;
Gem yielding blossom, yielding fruit,
Choice gums and precious balm;
Bless ye the nosegay in the vale,
And with the sweetness of the gale
Enrich the thankful psalm.
 XXIII
Of fowl???e'en ev'ry beak and wing
Which cheer the winter, hail the spring,
That live in peace or prey;
They that make music, or that mock,
The quail, the brave domestic cock,
The raven, swan, and jay.
 XXIV
Of fishes???ev'ry size and shape,
Which nature frames of light escape,
Devouring man to shun:
The shells are in the wealthy deep,
The shoals upon the surface leap,
And love the glancing sun.
 XXV
Of beasts???the beaver plods his task,
While the sleek tigers roll and bask,
Nor yet the shades arouse:
Her cave the mining coney scoops;
Where o'er the mead the mountain stoops,
The kids exult and browse.
 XXVI
Of gems???their virtue and their price,
Which hid in earth from man's device,
Their darts of lustre sheathe;
The jasper of the master's stamp,
The topaz blazing like a lamp,
Among the mines beneath.
 XXVII
Blest was the tenderness he felt
When to his graceful harp he knelt,
And did for audience call;
When Satan with his hand he quell'd
And in serene suspense he held
The frantic throes of Saul.
 XXVIII
His furious foes no more malign'd
As he such melody divin'd,
And sense and soul detain'd;
Now striking strong, now soothing soft,
He sent the godly sounds aloft,
Or in delight refrain'd.
 XXIX
When up to heav'n his thoughts he pil'd
From fervent lips fair Michal smil'd,
As blush to blush she stood;
And chose herself the queen, and gave
Her utmost from her heart, "so brave,
And plays his hymns so good."
 XXX
The pillars of the Lord are seven,
Which stand from earth to topmost heav'n;
His wisdom drew the plan;
His WORD accomplish'd the design,
From brightest gem to deepest mine,
From CHRIST enthron'd to man.
 XXXI
Alpha, the cause of causes, first
In station, fountain, whence the burst
Of light, and blaze of day;
Whence bold attempt, and brave advance,
Have motion, life, and ordinance
And heav'n itself its stay.
 XXXII
Gamma supports the glorious arch
On which angelic legions march,
And is with sapphires pav'd;
Thence the fleet clouds are sent adrift,
And thence the painted folds, that lift
The crimson veil, are wav'd.
 XXXIII
Eta with living sculpture breathes,
With verdant carvings, flow'ry wreathes,
Of never-wasting bloom;
In strong relief his goodly base
All instruments of labor grace,
The trowel, spade, and loom.
 XXXIV
Next Theta stands to the Supreme???
Who form'd, in number, sign, and scheme,
Th'illustrious lights that are:
And one address'd his saffrom robe,
And one, clad in a silver globe,
Held rule with ev'ry star.
 XXXV
Iota's tun'd to choral hymns
Of those that fly, while he that swims
In thankful safety lurks;
And foot, and chapitre, and niche,
The various histories enrich
Of God's record'd works.
 XXXVI
Sigma presents the social droves,
With him that solitary roves,
And man of all the chief;
Fair on whose face, and stately frame,
Did God impress His hallow'd name,
For ocular belief.
 XXXVII
OMEGA! GREATEST and the BEST,
Stands sacred to the day of rest,
For gratitude and thought;
Which bless'd the world upon his pole,
And gave the universe his goal,
And clos'd th'infernal draught.
 XXXVIII
O DAVID, scholar of the Lord!
Such is thy science, whence reward
And infinite degree;
O strength, O sweetness, lasting ripe!
God's harp thy symbol, and thy type
The lion and the bee!
 XXXIX
There is but One who ne'er rebell'd,
But One by passion unimpell'd,
By pleasures unentic'd;
He from Himself His semblance sent,
Grand object of His own content,
And saw the God in CHRIST.
 XL
Tell them, I am, JEHOVAH said
To MOSES; while earth heard in dread,
And, smitten to the heart,
At once above, beneath, around,
All Nature, without voice or sound,
Repli'd, "O Lord, THOU ART."
 XLI
Thou art???to give and to confirm,
For each his talent and his term;
All flesh thy bounties share:
Thou shalt not call thy brother fool;
The porches of the Christian school
Are meekness, peace, and pray'r.
 XLII
Open, and naked of offence,
Man's made of mercy, soul, and sense;
God arm'd the snail and wilk;
Be good to him that pulls thy plough;
Due food and care, due rest, allow
For her that yields thee milk.
 XLIII
Rise up before the hoary head,
And God's benign commandment dread,
Which says thou shalt not die:
"Not as I will, but as Thou wilt,"
Pray'd He Whose conscience knew no guilt;
With Whose bless'd pattern vie.
 XLIV
Use all thy passions!???love is thine,
And joy, and jealousy divine;
Thine hope's eternal fort,
And care thy leisure to disturb,
With fear concupiscence to curb,
And rapture to transport.
 XLV
Act simply, as occasion asks;
Put mellow wine in season'd casks;
Till not with ass and bull:
Remember thy baptismal bond;
Keep from commixtures foul and fond,
Nor work thy flax with wool.
 XLVI
Distribute: pay the Lord His tithe,
And make the widow's heart-strings blythe;
Resort with those that weep:
As you from all and each expect,
For all and each thy love direct,
And render as you reap.
 XLVII
The slander and its bearer spurn,
And propagating praise sojourn
To make thy welcome last;
Turn from Old Adam to the New;
By hope futurity pursue;
Look upwards to the past.
 XLVIII
Control thine eye, salute success,
Honor the wiser, happier bless,
And for thy neighbor feel;
Grutch not of Mammon and his leav'n,
Work emulation up to heav'n
By knowledge and by zeal.
 XLIX
O DAVID, highest in the list
Of worthies, on God's ways insist,
The genuine word repeat:
Vain are the documents of men,
And vain the flourish of the pen
That keeps the fool's conceit.
 L
PRAISE above all???for praise prevails;
Heap up the measure, load the scales,
And good to goodness add:
The gen'rous soul her Saviour aids,
But peevish obloquy degrades;
The Lord is great and glad.
 LI
For ADORATION all the ranks
Of angels yield eternal thanks,
And DAVID in the midst;
With God's good poor, which last and least
In man's esteem, thou to thy feast,
O blessed bridegroom, bidst.
 LII
For ADORATION seasons change,
And order, truth, and beauty range,
Adjust, attract, and fill:
The grass the polyanthus checks;
And polish'd porphyry reflects,
By the descending rill.
 LIII
rich almonds color to the prime
For ADORATION; tendrils climb,
And fruit-trees pledge their gems;
And Ivis with her gorgeous vest,
Builds for her eggs her cunning nest,
And bell-flowers bow their stems.
 LIV
With vinous syrup cedars spout;
From rocks pure honey gushing out,
For ADORATION springs;
All scenes of painting crowd the map
Of nature; to the mermaid's pap
The scaled infant clings.
 LV
The spotted ounce and playsome cubs
Run rustling 'mongst the flow'ring shrubs,
And lizards feed the moss;
For ADORATION beasts embark,
While waves upholding halcyon's ark
No longer roar and toss.
 LVI
While Israel sits beneath his fig,
With coral root and amber sprig
The wean'd advent'rer sports;
Where to the palm the jasmine cleaves,
For ADORATION 'mongst the leaves
The gale his peace reports.
 LVII
Increasing days their reign exalt,
Nor in the pink and mottled vault
The opposing spirits tilt;
And, by the coasting reader spi'd,
The silverlings and crusions glide
For ADORATION gilt.
 LVIII
For ADORATION rip'ning canes
And cocoa's purest milk detains
The western pilgrim's staff;
Where rain in clasping boughs enclos'd,
And vines with oranges dispos'd,
Embow'r the social laugh.
 LIX
Now labor his reward receives,
For ADORATION counts his sheaves
To peace, her bounteous prince;
The nect'rine his strong tint imbibes,
And apples of ten thousand tribes,
And quick peculiar quince.
 LX
The wealthy crops of whit'ning rice,
'Mongst thyme woods and groves of spice,
For ADORATION grow;
And, marshall'd in the fenced land,
The peaches and pom'granates stand,
Where wild carnations blow.
 LXI
The laurels with the winter strive;
The crocus burnishes alive
Upon the snow-clad earth:
For ADORATION myrtles stay
To keep the garden from dismay,
And bless the sight from dearth.
 LXII
The pheasant shows his pompous neck;
The ermine, jealous of a speck,
With fear eldues offence:
The sable, with his glossy pride,
For ADORATION is describ'd,
Where frosts the waves condense.
 LXIII
The cheerful holly, pensive yew,
And holy thorn, their trim renew;
The squirrel hoards his nuts;
All creatures batten o'er their stores,
And careful nature all her doors
For ADORATION shuts.
 LXIV
For ADORATION, DAVID's psalms
Life up the heart to deeds of alms;
And he, who kneels and chants,
Prevails his passions to control,
Finds meat and med'cine to the soul,
Which for translation pants.
 LXV
For ADORATION, beyond match,
The scholar bullfinch aims to catch
The soft flute's iv'ry touch;
And, careless on the hazel spray,
The daring redbreast keeps at bay
The damsel's greedy clutch.
 LXVI
For ADORATION in the skies,
The Lord's philosopher espies
The Dog, the Ram, and Rose;
The planet's ring, Orion's sword;
Nor is his greatness less ador'd
In the vile worm that glows.
 LXVII
For ADORATION, on the strings
The western breezes work their wings,
The captive ear to sooth.
Hark! 'Tis a voice???how still, and small???
That makes the cataracts to fall,
Or bids the sea be smooth!
 LXVIII
For ADORATION, incense comes
From bezoar, and Arabian gums;
And from the civet's fur:
But as for prayer, or e'er it faints,
Far better is the breath of saints
Than galbanum and myrrh.
 LXIX
For ADORATION from the down
Of dam'sins to th'anana's crown,
God sends to tempt the taste;
And while the luscious zest invites,
The sense, that in the scene delights,
Commands desire be chaste.
 LXX
For ADORATION, all the paths
Of grace are open, all the baths
Of purity refresh;
And all the rays of glory beam
To deck the man of God's esteem,
Who triumphs o'er the flesh.
 LXXI
For ADORATION, in the dome
Of Christ, the sparrows find a home;
And on His olives perch:
The swallow also dwells with thee,
O man of God's humility,
Within his Saviour CHURCH.
 LXXII
Sweet is the dew that falls betimes,
And drops upon the leafy limes;
Sweet, Hermon's fragrant air:
Sweet is the lily's silver bell,
And sweet the wakeful tapers smell
That watch for early pray'r.
 LXXIII
Sweet the young nurse with love intense,
Which smiles o'er sleeping innocence;
Sweet when the lost arrive:
Sweet the musician's ardour beats,
While his vague mind's in quest of sweets,
The choicest flow'rs to hive.
 LXXIV
Sweeter in all the strains of love,
The language of thy turtle dove,
Pair'd to thy swelling chord;
Sweeter, with ev'ry grace endu'd,
The glory of thy gratitude,
Respir'd unto the Lord.
 LXXV
Strong is the horse upon his speed;
Strong in pursuit the rapid glede,
Which makes at once his game:
Strong the tall ostrich on the ground;
Strong through the turbulent profound
Shoots xiphias to his aim.
 LXXVI
Strong is the lion???like a coal
His eyeball???like a bastion's mole
His chest against his foes:
Strong, the gier-eagle on his sail,
Strong against tide, th'enormous whale
Emerges as he goes.
 LXXVII
But stronger still in earth and air,
And in the sea, the man of pray'r;
And far beneath the tide;
And in the seat to faith assign'd,
Where ask is have, where seek is find,
Where knock is open wide.
 LXXVIII
Beauteous the fleet before the gale;
Beauteous the multitudes in mail,
Rank'd arms and crested heads:
Beauteous the garden's umbrage mild,
Walk, water, meditated wild,
And all the bloomy beds.
 LXXIX
Beauteous the moon full on the lawn;
And beauteous, when the veil's withdrawn,
The virgin to her spouse:
Beauteous the temple, deck'd and fill'd,
When to the heav'n of heav'ns they build
Their heart-directed vows.
 LXXX
Beauteous, yea beauteous more than these,
The shepherd king upon his knees,
For his momentous trust;
With wish of infinite conceit,
For man, beast, mute, the small and great,
And prostrate dust to dust.
 LXXXI
Precious the bounteous widow's mite;
And precious, for extreme delight,
The largess from the churl:
Precious the ruby's blushing blaze,
And alba's blest imperial rays,
And pure cerulean pearl.
 LXXXII
Precious the penitential tear;
And precious is the sigh sincere;
Acceptable to God:
And precious are the winning flow'rs,
In gladsome Israel's feast of bow'rs,
Bound on the hallow'd sod.
 LXXXIII
More precious that diviner part
Of David, ev'n the Lord's own heart,
Great, beautiful, and new:
In all things where it was intent,
In all extremes, in each event,
Proof???answ'ring true to true.
 LXXXIV
Glorious the sun in mid career;
Glorious th'assembled fires appear;
Glorious the comet's train:
Glorious the trumpet and alarm;
Glorious th'almighty stretch'd-out arm;
Glorious th'enraptur'd main:
 LXXXV
Glorious the northern lights a-stream;
Glorious the song, when God's the theme;
Glorious the thunder's roar:
Glorious hosanna from the den;
Glorious the catholic amen;
Glorious the martyr's gore:
 LXXXVI
Glorious???more glorious, is the crown
Of Him that brought salvation down,
By meekness, call'd thy Son:
Thou at stupendous truth believ'd;???
And now the matchless deed's achiev'd,
DETERMIN'D, DAR'D, AND DONE.
