Hearing Voices
Stones don't have, they are, voices: the clear
chapel bass of a granite house above the sea, 
the burr of sandstone, or a slate-flagged floor 
tuning itself to bootsteps... while I'm sitting here 
buttonholed by bricks and mortar, their eighty
year old gossip I can't catch or quite ignore: 
What did the doctor say? What happened in the end?
I thought: I'll strip one room to quietness. 
It peeled in whispers. Melancholic brown, a fuss 
of paisley, nursery pink, like tones of voice a friend 
or widower would spot in a crowd, years later: Yes, 
that's her; it wasn't what she said... Deciduous
mulched tatters, clogging underfoot. Me, me!
my blade grates plaster. It calls up the taste 
of dereliction, bashed-out walls with skin-
deep patchwork open to the sky, our curiosity, 
the wrecking ball. My smug new paper waits. 
Sweep up the dead. Then how shall I begin?
Cat's Whisker
'Cat got your tongue?'
Go on, I thought, laugh! (They did.) She 
understands. Charmer and snake in one, 
she padded in and coiled beside me.
I could talk to her
with her lithe knowing silences, 
no questions asked, only the whurr 
of a finely tuned apparatus
idling. 'Is it true?'
I whispered. “You see ghosts?” She seemed 
to smile. (Then again, cats always do.) 
But the family's day-long 'atmospheres'
pained her: that slow build 
and itch of static in grown-up altitudes 
above my head. She flexed. Yawned. Bristled. 
We were bad music to her. Yes, she knew
what wavelengths lace the air.
But how? The first twitch of her whiskers 
was the sign. She'd be stroked anywhere 
but there. Cat's whisker: the encyclopaedia 
showed a crystal set, a family 
bent close. Cack-rackle-hiss: a jumbling 
rush of atmospherics... Then, haltingly
at first, this small voice, coming through.
Revelations
It should have been the glassy sea 
where seraphim cast down their crowns
or something. It was stone. I was thirteen. 
Something had to change, so why not now, 
my first Communion? As the gloomy swell 
of the organ washed me to the altar rail 
I glimpsed her, kneeling: how her sensible 
shoe gaped back a little from her heel 
which was white and thin. I tried to equate 
the polystyrene wafer gummed to the roof 
of my mouth with any earthly taste, 
with any bread or body that I knew. 
I stared at the polished marble till my eyes 
mazed, and it was the surface of a pond, 
tensed. Slow mud-swirls began to rise 
like clouds about to part, beneath, beyond. 
Loving Spoonful 
Over the top they go, the do-or-die brigade. 
They fall in their thousands, feebly threshing. 
The fittest go bludgeoning on. They spread 
like spilt milk from a moment's indiscretion. 
They're a smear on the microscope slide.
Wipe it clean. So much for.... was it lust? 
A righteous going forth to multiply?
What sort of God whips in this Exodus, 
what grizzle-thighed games master hacking Go 
for it, lads! from the touchline?
No,
it's us, the love we make. Or think we do. 
It makes us, using me, love, using you. 
Post Marks
Estonia, 1985
1. A Snow Scene
The stamp brags: Salyut girdling the earth 
with flags and red tape. Two weeks in the air?
the postmark whispers, On whose desk? Beneath, 
the address argues from general to particular:
state, city, street (as cameras might zoom in 
on hundred-yard irregularities from space) 
to a number and a name. Inside, a snow scene
and a Christmas greeting: 'PEACE.
Good news. Our Vovka is come home. 
Is better. We walk a little out today 
in Progress Park. Each twig bears snow, 
its own load. (See, the camera tells no lie!)
All earth is held still, even the stream. 
There are bright bubbles in the ice. 
He stands, I stand, till we are numb, 
not to disturb. We hope for peace.' 
Can that be all? This game of patience 
is her life. Better? Home? No cipher 
at the censor's desk could trust words less. 
Camera? Lie? She means more
than she says. I slam the papers 
on my desk. Peace? Numb? We'll shake 
it out of her...
'What is there left to hide?'
she shrugs. 'What do you want me to say?
Is better, is better. Can it be denied?'
2 From The Other Side
'It's a quiet life. 
I play myself at chess 
turning the board each move
imagining a deathless 
master opposite, say
Alekhine... though Alekhine 
nearly did for me 
in '44 (after your time). 
Some Youth League cub
doing his good deeds mistook 
my Alekhine's Der Kampf
for quite another book.
I was frogmarched off.
By luck the Commissar 
was a player, of sorts. 
He kept me all night there 
at a trestle table in a room 
without windows. Doors 
clanged to, feet clicked 
and I glimpsed corridors. 
I played my best ever: 
I let him win. Towards dawn
he shouted , 'You don't try!'
A sacrifice, I swore. And won. 
He shook my hand: 'We play 
again. After the war.'
More often, though, 
I try to guess what your 
moves might have been. 
I never had your flair. 
You'd sacrifice the lot; 
you'd break through or 
be damned. I was the plodder 
and glad of a draw, 
the quiet life. 
So here 
I sit, the last of us, 
on the edge of my world, 
staring out across
the State Farm's great 
wide-opened squares 
of wheat. Or give the dead 
another game. Where 
in the world are you?
Did you really break through?
And would I post this, 
could I, if I knew?'
3 English As A Foreign Language
'Dear Sir, You will not know me but I wish you to. 
I study English two years. How I wish for some one 
I may correspond to. Mother says this might 
to be misunderstood. I know in others tongue 
are so many things I may not say. But I shall use 
a dictionary. Why should not peoples to each other write?
Here see my photograph. The Upper School Work Unit
at the Heroes Of October State Farm. Last left at back
besides the many potatoes, he in the spectacle is me. 
I am not strong in sport. And some time I am sad 
for the brothers and sisters I have not. I am unique. 
I keep old things, as stamps. I save small countries 
that are not now. (May I cut off your Queen's head 
if you write?) Also I have Grandfather's red and white 
chess men though I play not, a boar's tusk, a accordion, 
a bullet from the Patriotic War, a piece of meteorite 
that Father sent me (my best treasure) from Siberia.
He labours in important projects, and is long gone. 
Please write, if it is permitted. Tell me of your 
own self. And please teach me a good idiom to startle 
my teachers. For I confess, my grades are poor. 
I could not live in English. You can say too many little 
different things. Here it is simpler. Where you have four 
or five words, some time we have none at all.'
The Balance
for Helen Gamsa
It narrows down to us 
or so it seems. Grafting your tree 
to mine the genealogist makes history
converge to a precarious 
balance: man and wife,
yours/mine, left/right. Even that patch
gone threadbare on each side: we match 
the frayed ends, life
for life, Gentile for Jew.
What separated Abraham, packed west
from Riga on a slow train (all the rest 
implied: d.1942)
from Karl (d. 1943)
whose line went east to peter out somewhere 
beyond Irkutsk? A few miles, then a war.
'My enemy's enemy...'
can't quite make them friends
though the difference between one cattle truck 
and another is as history, hindsight or luck
dictates. So much depends.
The only point of balancing
is us. 'He who preserves one soul,' teased old 
Maimonides, 'is as one who preserves the world.'
If each equates with everything
how do we count? I'm afraid,
my love, if there's a balance it won't be 
the kind we keep, but that in which we 
hang, and shall be weighed. 
Baltic Amber
It's a drop from a tall well of light
in a forest of vertical shadows, a resinous 
stillness. It's warm to the touch
in my palm, at your throat; hospitable to us 
as to the ant, older than Christendom,
preserved in its sweet pine sap. Where are 
the hordes of Tartary, the Knights 
Of The Teutonic Order, Wallenstein, the Tsar?
Wear it close, night and day, a charm 
against history. It takes nothing to heart:
flipped up on the tideless shingle,
scavenged for a hoard, for booty; bartered, 
a gewgaw to the broad and brilliant 
piazzas of the south. Then clutched in flight
by a dark-haired child, in crowds, 
on platforms, cobbles, quays. Crossing by night
see her sleep; the ship creaks
swaying like a forest and her fingers, thin
as a grandmother's, clutch the stone
like life. Tonight it lies against your skin.
A Breton Dance 
A stone grey town with a name like a bell:
Tinteniac. Was this the place? The time?
The square was empty, blinkered for the night.
On, out, beyond a hoarding ZONE INDUSTRIELLE
we drove between vacant Euro-factories, 
beached white whales. And this was it:
a lorry park like a floodlit airstrip, 
and the dancers. Then the bark and wheeze 
of the bombarde cut the hubbub, keen 
as bad cider. The shock of it flowed 
among them, losing young and old 
in a pattern of spirals, yet a single line.
A hundred heel-and-toes became one long 
slow shudder, like a snake down all its scales. 
We backed away. It flexed its coils. 
The pipe throbbed round and round and on 
into the night, needling, defying rhyme, 
reason, development or cure: the sweet ache 
of dreaming yourself a nation. When you wake 
the place is always wrong. That, or the time. 
Hole In The Ground
Delabole
New times, new voices, pebbledash on slate
- what's it to me? I'm passing through 
not like those strangers on the trim estate 
that was Lobb's field. Yes, but I know 
that snicket at the lane's end, and I let 
it lead me, back, to what the cottages 
conceal. I duck the Danger sign to edge 
close, closer.... Whack, and jackdaws sheer 
off scolding across half a mile of emptiness. 
I almost catch the ricketing of winding gear, 
the shudder and whump of a blast. Almost. 
They dug a small mountain out of here
and camped in the slag: sullen, swart, 
'close as one slate to t'other', short 
of shank and temper; drunk, “a pestilence”
to good farm folk, until a lonely Methodist 
unfurled damnation. A mutinous silence. 
Then one voice, a slow joke, 'Mister, 
we ben in the Pit a long time since.'
A dropped stone, rousing to a grim 
accord of echoes, a Revival hymn. 
'We expect them, fervently: the saints,
those stern tremendous men
with eyes like boreholes, waterfalls of beard, 
a steady hand 
to split souls cleanly at one blow. 
They will descend
any day, in thunderclouds of steam
from the Great Western Railway, crying: Where
the pulpit? Where the text? And we 
shall lead them to the quarry's edge.
Behold, the earth laid open at the page, 
at the difficult passage. They will make it clear.'
In the slate museum
he's on show, preserved, the last. 
He turns from me 
to question the grain, his chisel tip
nosing the spot,
the mallet almost gentle in his fist.
He knocks. The slab
comes open crisply with a sigh.
He leans ajar
two perfect tablets as if I 
might read. Stooked 
sheaves behind him, they recede
to headstones packed 
aslant in chapel plots; low slate-
scaled terraces
which darken under rain, roofs
shivering to steel. 
He stares back. Neither of us moves. 
Stonepecker
At the crack 
of dawn a shadow slopes 
up the lane to the quarry:
old Jope.
Rack-rack.
What's that kickstarts 
like the whack and trip 
of a dicky heart?
A snuff of smoke,
a burnt stone smell.
Rackatack bashes on 
like a pecker in Hell. 
Gone broke. 
No copper no zinc no coal. 
Got the richest vein of nothing 
in a county full of holes. 
Behind his back
it's: Old Man Jope got no hope.
Scrubs his face with a stone for soap.
Tied the knot with a length of rope... 
No joke. 
He had a missus who nobody saw. 
He let her out once 
in 1954. 
She ran amuck 
in Plymouth, ran off with a sailor. 
He's been digging ever since. 
Going to catch them in Australia. 
Come unstuck. 
The vicar came enquiring for his soul. 
Damned if he could find it. 
Must have lost it down the hole. 
Got the quack 
up from Bodmin to examine his head. 
It was granite to the core
with a little trace of lead. 
There's the shack
where he sits in tumbledown weather. 
Stone dust and diesel grease 
hold it together. 
Take a peek. 
Hush. The rackatack stops. 
You can hear claws click 
when a jackdaw hops. 
Lob a brick 
down the lifelong drop.
Quick
run run away and don't look back
'cos the stonepecker's after you
CRACK.
Moore
Recumbent Figure, 1934
unnh grunnh? grohh
wassamatter? wh'am I? who the? No
go'way. I was dreaming. I was deep. 
Where was I? Dancing. Arm in arm in... she.
All round me. We was waltzing, slow 
slow, round and round. And suddenly
there's all this... unstuff. Is it sky?
I never asked. You did this to me
damn you. You made me this: I 
am. But I can take it. Mass-
culine I ham, a bullwork. Charlie Atlas 
torse, the strangth of clunched hands, 
nubbled biceps (feel that!) in a man-
to-manly buddy-hug.
But mateless, 
muzzlebound, manhandling
unthings. Unnnh. A not-
hole in the heart. You, you abandoned 
me, you left me wanting... what? 
The words gro wrong. It's a terribore 
think, this onliness, this wanting.... more. 
There must be others, no? No eyes to see, 
I not-quite-touch them, close. Quick flimsy 
curious things, warm breaths...
I'm floored,
yes down but no not out - a lourdly 
drunk who might yet lurge upright, embrace 
the emptiness and astonish the dance-floor 
with a coup of (how to put it?) grace. 
Apple Gatherers
Stanley Spencer, 1913
Each night, for the men, 
a dole of stoat's-piss cider in the barn.
Women had homes to go to.
Dossing in straw
his head was filled with apples, apples. He saw
Martha, plain dull Martha,
in a smudged green sunlight
coming steady as a queen to her confinement,
apron bellied full 
of fruit. Boy Jack
had goosed her, hooting as her hands went up
and all the apples spilled
out from her, sound-
lessly, endlessly, helplessly down. 
They'd bruise and spoil. 
At dawn the slow ache
of the job resumed. Tree by tree, back to back
they worked closer, within reach.
Neither turned or spoke
as he slipped her the prize of his pick.
Their forearms touched. 
What passed between them?
In a freak of sunlight they saw generations 
like as apples, spilling 
from them, heat-
tranced puppets, bobbing, aching in a sweet 
druggy smell of fermentation. 
She saw a frump of a girl
who coveted one beauty for herself
and bit. She saw the slug 
in its flesh-pit, glutting 
in all innocence. He saw the rootling 
snout of the old pink sow, 
shrill piglets squabbling 
into her as she rolled - her flabby grin, 
her battery of dugs - and 
Master's coming, quick!
he saw a boy thrash the pigs off with a stick.
The apple dropped and lay. 
The picture's dated 
1913. Next year she'd be picking again 
alongside raw boys and old men.
Little Dancer
after Degas
She's stopped in her tracks, her face 
up, eyes and lips
tight, braced 
for what? Applause? A slap, more like. 
Or a kiss from a dusty uncle. Not in spite 
but because of the ash-brittled lace 
that frills her hips
she's irreversibly 
exposed, 
betwixt and between, 
not quite 
a child, her body not quite dragooned into grace, 
her stocking puckered at one knee... 
She's very old,
fourteen,
and cast in bronze. 
Her plinth is wired. After we've gone 
and the attendant snicks the lights out one 
by one, a black box on the wall 
considers her. It watches, all 
night, as her mother might have done. 
Tar Boilers
Sleepwalkers
wading in bright mist 
or deep sea divers 
shuffling silt, they cuss 
the dodgy burner. 
First sun prinks the frost.
Each word becomes visible.
They crank 
the handle and the dribbly 
cauldron gulps, volcanic. 
Gloss-black slurry 
nudges down the shute
steaming like fresh manure, 
serviceable.
Now they tamp 
a square plot. The roller 
bumbles and clanks
and seams it matt. 
The driver huffs and stamps. 
A thermos steams in his mitt. 
Cars cough awake.
A small boy waits, 
the pavement quaking at his feet. 
He buffs a bright 
new minted ha'penny:
1958.
Now? Now. He tweaks it in. 
Signed, sealed. He runs away. 
Here Today
I've lost them, scrabbling in the leaves, 
small and clear, already further gone 
than I'd realised, down an avenue of trees 
as down a rabbit hole or telescope. One 
stalks a squirrel with a tail like smoke 
in its I'm-a-little-teapot pose; away 
it switchbacks, stop-go, quick-quick-slow.
Kid brother has come up against 
immensity, his gaze corkscrewed up 
the leathery torsions of a chestnut bole,
up helplessly. One more twist and plop, 
he'll be flat on his back... No, 
that was me, or so the story went, 
fond family apocrypha. It sends me 
leafing back through the concordances. 
Here's a touch of the bark, its peppery 
tang. But there's no trace 
of me, touching; still less of whoever
watched, as I watch now. No face 
to the gaze. What gets preserved is trivia 
like that camera obscura, some Victorian 
inventor's toy. We paid our pence to lean 
above a pale disc pitted like the moon 
and clacked the shutter open; green 
resolved to trees and there, a couple 
dodged from cover, larking silently, 
then caught each other, then looked up 
and pointed... straight at me.
Slap, and a ripe burr ricochets 
to burst at my feet. It shocks 
me to my senses. Here today 
and... let's leave it at that. 'Look, 
look!' Their hands are full to running over:
chestnuts, glossy-dark as good antiques. 
We'll crack them, roast them on a fire 
and they'll be sweet.
A Cornish Saint
They can't be serious, those two-a-penny saints
washed up like holy jetsam - no mere boats 
for them but millstones, coffins, kegs. So delicate 
Saint Ia had to float 
in on a leaf. Their visitations stopped abruptly 
as the trippers' now. St Ives is emptied like a till 
and counted. Stiff winds scrub the town. 
Summer timetables tatter and flap; awnings rattle 
up, are battened down
as the season stows itself away, no time for me 
and precious little shelter. Ia's chapel on the cliff
is padlocked and the path slips ledge 
to ledge, nowhere to go but down, brittle thrift
for handholds. At the edge
deep water thumps and swashes, almost within reach. 
There's a wicked glitter underfoot. I'm not the first. 
Someone lugged bottles here and sat
and drank, and watched, and drank, with a thirst 
he couldn't fathom; then smashed
every last one. Green glass lapped him like the sea
and then? Was that her on the water as the tide-
race tightened to the point, as the Godrevy
light began to pry. 'Oh pray for us, unauthorised 
ridiculous Saint Ia, in these heavy
times... ' And did she beckon: Come with me...?
 Magic Lantern
Bishop Rock, Scilly
Flash... Dusk. Shadows scud off the sea;
the boulders shrill. To westward, the reef 
malingers, sucking its teeth thoughtfully.
Flash... Men on the rock. Brought on the tide 
by sceptical boatmen they pick, hack, drive piles 
till waves slop their knees. Or crouch inside 
their low stone barrack. Gales thud spray 
on the thatch. One morning they creep out to see 
a year's hard labour swatted clean away. 
Flash... Calm, now. A bright regatta 
noses through the flounce of ten-foot weed. 
Boatmen unload their top-hat-frock-coat betters,
bustles teeter and a small string orchestra 
assembles its parts, unsteadily. A thin waltz 
ebbs and flows as, first, the Lord Proprietor 
and his Lady, then each in rank, gravely, 
circumspectly, dance. Against the waves' one-two 
their rhythm counters: one-two-three one-two-three.
Flash... Polite applause. They wait for light to fade. 
Ashore, the navvies drink up six months' pay 
and swear Never Again. Out here, a toast - To Trade 
And Navigation - as the lighthouse lifts the shadows 
with its first flash, then, in its own cockeyed time, 
quick-quick-slow, and wait, and wait, quick-slow. 
Flash... Wrecks decrease; a local industry 
goes down. The islands empty. Still, the boulders 
shrill: storm petrels ghost in off the sea. 
The Lookout
for J.K.G.
It's a rain-swabbed cell, niched high
in a shale slab headland
on a wrecking coast. Inside, 
dark like the dark inside the eye. 
It's a post not manned this century. 
Three arched windows
west, south, east
take in the brilliant deceptions of the sea
in sunlight, or how it mulls the glow
now as the snaggled shore
beds down in shadow.
Waves muster, sharpening the narrow
spit of black where one last fisherman
shoulders his tackle to push 
up the steep scree path 
to here. His breath drags. He stoops in 
shucking his bag. He tastes the cool 
church smell of slate. 
Where he stood 
pale foamings pucker and spill 
till there's nothing. And suddenly
he's chilled. It's late. 
He should be going but 
can't move. The long hush of the sea 
has silenced him. A wink of light 
traces the coast road. 
Now it swivels, fans 
up, up and seaward, as if taking flight. 
Shadow On The Water
for Bob Devereux
We surprised each other. 
Leaving friends asleep, 
the house sunk in breathing,
I slipped out. And there
he stood, knee deep 
in grey reflection: brother 
heron, rumpled stiltman
with a stoop. One look 
askance; he shrugged, 
neck cricked, wings hauling, 
gone. But not before 
I knew him, mon 
semblable, gangle-
bodied stalker, shadow 
on the water, dumb professor 
of the quick eye and the slow 
step. He lost his kill.
I broke the mirror.
From The Fast Train 
The town falls by the wayside. Gone astray 
in the urban outback, our racketing dulls 
to an auctioneer's gabble. Rails splay 
into rusty sidings. Long grass rankles. 
There's a rash of fireweed, smatterings of may 
and there, gone feral on clinker, a shock 
of lupins, wild colonials. Was that a goat 
cropping the scrub beside a landlocked 
quarter acre? Scratched earth and a rain butt?
Thin smoke tippling from a corrugated shack 
no path leads to or from? And who'd 
be waiting there, who'd be at home 
nursing a Coronation mug, tea stewed 
to a metallic tang? Yes, that's him. 
'Such a time,' he'd say. 'What kept you?'
Tabernacle Yard 
Strict and particular, dwindling 
fiercely, they met '8 p.m. 
God Willing' in a firebrick 
kennel up a cul-de-sac 
so tight to the railway's cinder 
scarp they timed a Psalm - 
The Lord reigns; let the earth quake; 
let the people tremble - 
to contend with the 8.15. 
Through narrow panes 
they glimpsed the fireman's face 
bent to his chink of Hell. 
'So shall the world be borne away, 
smoke streaming after fire, 
the Romish temples, the gin palaces, 
the music halls, the horseless 
carriages. Thunder by night. Yea, 
brothers, let us prophesy!'
The end is always nigh; theirs came 
and went. The padlock on the gate 
fat as a fobwatch clinks and swings. 
A rusty block and tackle hangs 
in chains. Wrecks sans wings, lights, chrome, 
everything, our write-offs wait 
for GOFF & SON, the resurrection 
men who promise BODY WORK (beneath, 
NO JOB TOO SMALL) but never seem 
to come, except to underfeed 
one sidelong mean Alsatian. 
It smiles humbly, with its teeth. 
The Private Sector
FABRICATIONS, the sign says, up an alley 
that could be the scene of a crime. 
The workforce has gone cannily 
to ground. Whatever their business is 
it's none of mine. 
Under charked brick arches 
on the quarter hour, each shed 
fills with a labyrinthine 
grumbling as a train crumps overhead. 
Face up, spraddled beneath a van 
there's a body in a boiler suit. 
That monkey wrench might be the weapon. 
But it's only oil 
puddling beside him, and his foot 
taps reggae, his mouth shapes the wail. 
Head swollen with a Rasta tam, he's 
wired to far-off sounds, deaf-mute 
to the joiners' operatic agonies. 
A power saw whinges and stutters. 
They're feeding the caged blade. 
It digs in, slobbering, but is 
wrestled free; it runs shrill. 
The planks are clattered out and laid 
to rest in the sun. The smell, still 
warm, turns the mechanic's head. 
He smiles. We've got it made. 
It's simple as sliced bread. 
Man and Wife II
Mary and Thomas Holmes
'Stoke up the fire.'
She was not to be gainsaid. 
Brushing words aside 
her hand stubbed There! 
and There! She made 
us understand. 'The bureau?'
Yes. 'The drawer?' Yes 
yes. We were so slow 
bringing to light the yellowed 
trove of albums: pressed 
flowed smiles of distant 
aunts; old men who stared 
as if they knew. 'You want 
to look?' No! And a blunt 
jab: On the fire. She spared 
nobody, least of all 
herself. That night 
she died. Raking the grate 
we salvaged one stiff curl 
of silvery ash. Some quite 
unknowable boy soldier's 
face was ghosted there, 
blacked up, benighted, 
hair turned white 
as zinc, like hers. 
*
A son of the Empire, fallen 
among Cornishmen, 
to a narrow one-
street village and a tribe of in-laws
closed against you. 
Your colonial tan 
soon bleached in the slatey rain. 
By the time I knew, 
you had shrunk away 
as near invisible as flesh permits, 
the ghost of a military 
bearing. (No defence:
I wouldn't let you be, with my 
'But what is India?')
India was words
like Bangalore... Madras... The hiss
like gas of Nag, 
king cobra.
Rikki-Tikki-Tavi juggling 
Nagaina's egg, 
an unexploded shell. 
Your Gurkha kukri. ('Don't you tell 
Grandma I showed 
you this...')
The sip-sigh of a stainless blade
from its scabbard. 
'Did you fight?'
I stroked its edge. 'Did you kill?'
Another long word:
ceremonial... 
which led you to Bombay, 
'a brave show',
a bazaar of hooters, 
flags and bands, three cheers 
for a plucky mongoose
mascot in the colours 
as the troopship hauled away 
for France. 
They say 
your face was one raw scar 
from mustard gas. 
I never saw. 
The Ghost Trap
We climbed for weeks. After the armpit weather of Barrackpur 
the air was like iced water: we were gasping, we were 
gulping breaths that stung our throats, yet craving more. 
Then the tree cover broke, and the clouds: first sight 
of the mountains, ranged against us, the whole skyline
rucked, keen as if freshly broken, dangerously bright. 
It flashed back our hearsay like a heliograph: the Tsar's 
agents in Lhasa... whispers in the Dalai Lama's ear... 
moves in the Great Game... remember Kabul? the Afghan wars?
We pushed closer, into the encirclement, crunching on ice-
locked screes that creaked under the weight of sunlight. 
And we climbed. Once, in the shadow of a precipice 
we saw a bright snow flurry cresting from its lip. The track 
was a rumour, all the gullies blind. Then deep in the rocks 
a flicker and a drip alerted us. The stream ran on, not back. 
We had crossed over. 'Hip hip...' I started. (I was young.)
No cheer came. The stillness was miles high. And a stone-
slip whispered. Echoes snicked round and round and on. 
The word nobody breathed (yes, they remembered) was Kabul - 
the expedition slaughtered, one man dragged home by his mule. 
We eyed the overhangs, expecting the shot, the manmade rockfall 
for five days. Chonk. 
We wheeled. In the mist, chonk 
chonk. We piled into cover just as something 
like a short-arsed cow
botched out of greasy string 
shambled by, its belled head bobbing. Now 
we saw the huts, 
a village slunk among boulders, 
patched about with hides; no windows, no doors
but a single hole
where the smoke dribbled out, 
where flat urchin faces peeped, then shrilled 
and our way was blocked. Squat raggedy 
bundles of men - were they men? -
swarmed and chittered. The Captain's voice
stayed them a moment; they faltered, then 
flared. They were coming. At their head 
a yappy pug-dog of a man, preposterous 
with brass and bangles clanking, made 
wild passes with an antique blunderbuss 
and Fire! the Captain gave the word. 
The mob shuddered. They seemed to be 
locked in a slow dance, swaying, 
as the Maxim gun tracked patiently 
back, forth, back. So this is war, 
I thought dimly. Why don't they run?
Then their back rank broke. The crush 
subsided with a groan. We hurried on. 
And Lhasa? The Forbidden City was a slum.
Sewers slopped the palace walls. 
His Most Serene
Magnificence, we were informed, was not at home. 
The Captain thundered our demands 
to underlings
who nodded and nodded and smiled. Why had we come, 
they asked, so laden and so far? Yes
they would sign 
a paper if it pleased us... And there was nothing 
more to say or stay for. 
As we turned 
to go, one spoke in English. 'A question, sirs?
What manner of being 
is a Tsar?'
We scoured the monastery for food. 
No meat. Scrapings of meal. 
It was a rat run without corridors, 
insulting sense as one bare cell 
led to another, or a bare courtyard
or... Pungent nothingness. I stumbled, 
cursed, then saw. It was a shrine 
scabby with jewels. And there he was, 
bunched in his robe. I'd never seen 
a man so old, so utterly feeble. 
He came straight at me. He was daft 
with terror, brandishing this thing, 
this... what? A rickety fly swat 
or a spider web of sticks and string. 
I stood, I almost laughed, 
I was stern, I shouted, all 
but wept. He would not stop. 
When I pushed him he was light 
as dust. He crumpled up 
without a sound against the wall. 
...
'Ghost Trap (Tibet).' It was in Tunbridge Wells, 
some auction room. After fifty years, the very article. 
I must have twitched. 'Sold to the Colonel!'
and the auctioneer came blathering like the fool 
he is. 'Of course. Old India man like you. 
Just up your street.' So here it is. No real value, 
common as dirt out there apparently. Do what you will 
with it when I'm gone. But now? On the bedside table, 
yes, within reach. Damned silly, isn't it? But still...
Coelacanth
Apres le deluge, moi... 
Survivor of survivors 
(was the Rock of Ages cleft for this?)
he's found his niche, 
his bunker, his last ditch. 
Evolution blunders overhead; 
the wreckage comes sifting down.
He paces midnight mud plains 
on stiff fin-struts, almost legs. 
He'll get it right next time. 
Meanwhile there's the dark and the cold 
and the tons per square inch to hold him 
tight. (Dredged up, he'd split 
his sides.) On the face of the waters 
life flirts, glances, shudders 
to and fro, like shoals of wind.
The Clever Children 
'The chicken? Or the egg?' Their father 
teased them on their way to bed. 
They lay awake for hours, those clever 
children. Then one little egghead said:
'Inside the shell, the embryonic hen 
has got all her cells in her, even the cell 
of her egg, within which...' So on, in, on 
in time, to the smallest conceivable! Well,
now they couldn't sleep. They had to see 
the ultimate egg, the egg of the future. On the way 
how many breakages, unwanted omelettes, casually 
discarded chickens? At last, there it lay 
so tiny, so precious, so shimmeringly slight 
it made them feel tremendous, like a pride 
of giants. Now to sleep, but... 'Wait!'
said one. Yes? 'What's inside?'
So they split it. What hatched out? 
'Quick,' they yammered, 'put it back again.'
But those clever children couldn't, not 
with all the king's horses, all the king's men. 
Son and Heir
He's up. And off, a tipsy 
tightrope turn 
juggling with gravity. 
The ascent of man
starts here. Like one spotlit 
he makes his stand
on the brink of a big-top
drop. The ground 
sways. One false step 
and... 
Will he take it stonily
like Sitting Bull?
Like holy Job? Or melancholy
Charlie, fall-
guy to the old joke? Will he
heck! He's baby-bald
Khrushchev, blaming a shoe
on the diplomatic table:
'WE WILL BURY YOU...'
No joke. He will. 
Boys Fishing
He's got it, all the nonchalance
of a flick knife. Ask his mates. What he wants 
he wants. See how they turn to him. 
He's snagged a gout of weed and swings it in 
slap at their feet. They flinch 
then scrum to see it twitch: a mud-green three-inch
crab that bridles free of weed, 
huffs, bubbles at the sky and can't conceive 
of such as him who casually, ac-
curately heels his new black boot down crack!
It's mushed, still bubbling, legs awry, 
as he turns back to his rod. Go on, ask him why.
“Cause I didn't want it.' Ten 
years old, he is, and unassailable. An innocent. 
A Mercy
Do something, she said. 
The demolition 
site had been a bomb blast in slow motion
and still smouldered. A faulty streetlamp 
fizzled and pinked and - there! - that blank 
rasp, clearly now: a cry about the size 
and weight of a baby's. I picked and prised 
among tipped slabs and shadows, till I saw 
where it lay. I wrapped it gingerly. Indoors, 
unswaddled, it curled and quivered. Fleas 
snap-crackled in its spines. Leaves, 
ash and clay crusted the lumpy bag 
of a body that it somehow could not drag 
as if I'd never freed it. Something inside 
was crushed but not severed. And it cried. 
DO something!
She watched as I filled 
a rusty pail. I nudged it in. It scrabbled, 
wallowed, useless. I rammed it under, 
holding my own breath and holding, longer 
than seemed possible, till with a shudder 
it went slack. A silvery-quick globe of air 
slipped from its mouth, broke surface 
with a pock. I looked up. But her face 
was turned away.
The Cloud Chamber
for Nigel Crooks, 1951-1972
'You crack an atom, what's left? Particles, 
bits. It's like Meccano: proton, neutron, quark. 
Don't you see...?'
The things you knew.
The rest of us set our horizon at the girls'
school down the road. Whatever you 
dreamed of, you left us in the dark. 
('I couldn't follow him,' one friend confessed
after the fact, then 'Why? The waste, the waste!'
then again 'Did he know something we don't?')
'There's nothing to it.' Your pale face 
lit on a smile. 'A molecule? A galaxy?
Nothing but little obstacles in space.'
As clear as mud. Just for a moment, though, 
your laughter shook me. It was wild - 
a touch of vertigo. I saw the solid world 
come unput at our feet. I didn't see 
the logic: how you would leave behind 
friends, family, a fixed address, 
even your books, until
one tactful line 
in the Hatched-Matched-and-Despatched: Died
Suddenly. No note, no clue, 
you left us nothing, as if we were less 
than nothing (little obstacles?) to you.
'Why?' You'd have shrugged; worse, smiled:
'Why anything?' What could I say? 
Except... one icy-crisp November night 
we watched for meteors, crouched back to back 
for warmth. 'There!' 'Where?' “'Too late.'
A scatter-fall of debris from deep space. 
I felt you shivering. I saw the track 
in the cloud chamber. Bits. The waste. 
The toll of microseconds. Particle decay.
Flying Dreams
Philip Smythe Raddall, 'missing' 1943.
A dinky yellow dump-truck rusts 
in brisk spring sun, up to its knees
in rubble and daisies. The straight thrust 
of a tarmac strip runs out
to grass, an order countermanded 
suddenly or overcome by doubt.
The outfield yawns, in service only 
to be empty, stuck in a drole de guerre. 
The windsock wags its trunk in memory
of braver days, whenever they were. 
It points. It points to me. 
There's a throat-clearing clatter, thinned 
by distance, and a rickety single file 
of trainers nudges out to sniff the wind, 
snub-nosed. They toe the line
in cough-and-shuffle unison.
One shudders and shifts; its whine
bites. And I'm hooked. The hop into flight 
is nothing to that lift of pitch, that pulse, 
that will to go. Going, gone, he's high 
off the edge of the hilltop; up he pulls 
by his bootstraps into blustery bright 
emptiness. And I've lost him. Phil, 
it's you, boy uncle. It's your after-image 
winking on an RAF-blue sky, the thrill 
of it, the pathos. Dreams. I grew
up in your hand-me-downs, your shadow
and your name. I ached to follow you. 
At the Air Show, I decided to enlist. 
I'd fly. But I was only six, and besides,
short-sighted.
Overhead an engine skips
a beat; he's dipping back and rides
in as on surf. The undercarriage tips 
turf and he flinches, doesn't slow 
but bucks and revs again. (Somewhere 
an officer's voices is crackling: No.
Again. Till it's perfect.) Lifts,
wingtips wobbling. He hops the hedge
and away. I gasp. You'd have laughed:
'The flying's easy. It's the ground 
that gets you in the end...' Yes, 
other uncles, never you. No matter how 
they fade and fall to reminiscences
you won't come down, not now.
'Phil? One of the Few?
Not him. No, Bomber Command.
Ground crew. 
He never thought to fly
only they lost so many.
Tail-end Charlie on a Wellington.
Proud? He was twenty...'
As I take my leave
her look halts me: 'Tonight
as you walked in
I saw him, to the life. 
Put you in uniform...'
Outside, I'm shivering: fight
or fight. There's the usual skyline 
on the usual rust of light. 
And suddenly, the moon.
Numb, effing
at the gut 
gripe cold, bone 
cracking din, 
the cramp. No 
where to look 
but back. Slow 
grey silk sea 
in moon frost 
then a blacked 
out coastline 
blotting foam
then
flak! Ripped 
glitter chills 
and the shock 
wave butts you. 
Bastards! Hung 
in a steep 
manoeuvre 
you look down 
where scattered 
seeds bud flame
and bloom. Then 
fire! Fumble 
with the gun. 
Can't. Numb. Ice 
bitches it. 
(Night fighters 
closing.) Ice 
patterns craze 
the glass. Fire! 
But it feels 
like ice.
Ten 
thousand dead 
in Hamburg 
(Do you read 
me? Do you..?) 
and among
the missing 
here's your name.
Fire-storm: a brave new word. 
Just drub enough bombs in
(we did it, Phil) and fire 
feeds on itself, becomes its own 
bellows and furnace. It was war, 
it was orders, it was work well done. 
Sleep, after all those long nights 
waiting for the moon. Your ash sifts down 
with dockers, mothers, dreaming Hitler brats. 
It was Hamburg, it was Dresden, 
a new world. We did it, Phil. Sleep 
if you can. Will that blaze 
smelt names, ranks, all our histories 
together, till they lie at peace? 
Sleep sound. I'll have the dreams.
Charlot's War
As the front falls back towards Armentieres 
the asylum keepers flit. Their charges, touched 
or dumb, come out slowly, blinking. Where 
is all the world going? What's this slow ruck 
on the high road: bikes, prams, barrows stacked 
with pots, pans, piglets, children? A khaki truck 
blares. In the dust, a Madonna and Child in one, 
Mimette rocks herself. Jean waves and grins. Charlot, 
six-foot slab-featured farmer's son, 
sees the ooze of fear made flesh. He bolts. 
He's away across ploughed fields, ducking low 
to the earth that smells of... what?
He forgets. Now he pants in a ditch. He slops 
his face with scummy water, laps a bellyful 
without mug or manners, then studies the plops 
of small frogs for an hour, Upright again, 
he finds a land that's no man's but his own. 
Nearby, a cow helves to a pitch of pain. 
He smells milk frothed warm in a jug
and follows. But the farm is shuttered blind, 
a trap: there's a whinging snarl. A starved dog 
dances on its rope like a baited bear, Run, 
Charlot, run. The forest soothes him, but beyond 
he drops, bristling. There's a wounded truck. Its man, 
a soldier, bends beside it, thoughtfully 
slashing each tyre, then beats each headlight in, 
then unloads from the cab - Charlot cranes to see - 
a wireless with a grinning dial and knobs like eyes - 
Charlot gapes to hear - and with a pickaxe handle 
crunches, then steps back, not feeling Charlot rise 
behind him. Big hands clasp, and wring. Now mile 
on mile Charlot stumbles and sobs. And there's 
a cottage. He tires abruptly like a child 
come home. It's almost welcoming the way the door 
gives at one shove, into cool stale dark. 
He wakes hours later, on the parlour floor 
to thunder, close. He creaks open the shutters. 
Light catches an iron cage. He rips it. Three 
canaries flop out. Two are dead. One flutters 
weakly, crazily. He soothes it, sets it free.
3.
GAMES OF CONSEQUENCE
Blank Page, Marginal Notes
ground zero
is the blank page
nothing
half a mile
the zone of simple 
irremediable cries
a mile or two
first childish fumblings: 'a kind 
of flash', 'a sort of boom'
fifty miles distant, miles
high, the language becomes almost lyrical:
'like a living thing', 'the mouth of Hell, 'but... beautiful'
* 
It's a question of technique: the calibration 
of charged matter, priming of the fickle 
fissile words, tact, timing. At the critical 
mass there's nothing but the elegant equation. 
Roget gives forty-one synonyms for the verb
Die, seventy-five for Kill... 'Don't bother me
with conscientious scruples,' said Enrico Fermi.
'After all, the thing is technically superb.'
* 
Oh, Little Boy, 
you had no mother, 
no midwife, no wetnurse. 
Little wonder 
you grew mean. 
Conceived of in equations 
you stepped like Athene 
from the big man's 
headache, fully armed. 
If you grew high and mighty, 
little wonder, if you stood 
erect precociously 
to punch a fist 
clean through the under
belly of the sky
it's little wonder 
your grandfather 
Einstein grieved, 
'I should have been 
a watchmaker.'
You stamped your foot 
above Hiroshima. 
Our childhood died. 
Oh, little man...
* 
Mushroom? Why not coral? Burning bush?
Crown of thorns? I keep it on my shelf 
as I write. Find words for me, 
it grins. Forget yourself. 
A skull? A cudgel? And I'm dumb, 
foolish and for a flash (poor
Yorick) feel what fills that numb-
skull: hunger, hunger. 'More,'
as cities crumpling like sea, 'More,' sea
like white birds scattered, birds 
like ash, 'More,' feasts of simile, 
a fat world ripe with words 
bow down before it: death's head. 
It consumes them, and it is not fed.
Early Warning
This is it. No panic, no sirens. A boy shies a stone. 
A girl blows her dandelion out in one. Footballers, bright 
confetti in an updraught, rise and dangle. Each alone 
we squint towards the ball, the seed, the what or why 
that won't (we should have known)
reach ground. A braid of white 
undoes itself across the poster-paint-blue sky, 
a finger trailed in water, a ripped seam of foam.
At last... as if grey birds that strangers' hands ignite 
from vans in distant lay-bys had come ghosting home. 
At last... That's all: 
a feeling curiously like relief, 
like peace on earth, just as the missiles fall. 
The moment before moments will be fused 
to ever after... and I wake, in time. Complicity
before the fact! I think. What did I do?
from A Game of Consequences
Grandmother watched the wind. Between the lines of cirrus
she read storms at sea. We have a lot to learn. 
The forecast comes on sinister with reassurances:
we may drink the rain. The wind has swung back west and we 
are not to worry. There is no cause for concern 
except being told so... No, the count is not significantly 
above normal. Soon enough, this will seem normal, mark 
their words. These sacks of cumulus, trundled overland 
a hundred miles, still fat with the Atlantic, used to hark 
me back to the rinse of waves, to cliffs scrubbed bare 
as facts. Now I toy with the map: a small leak fanned 
from Hinkley by a mild wind from the west, and where 
would we be? Here, in the zone marked Uninhabitable 
For Twenty Years. Another superstitious game to play...
Don't search the sky for omens. On the parlour wall 
three china ducks rise, sinister - from left to right.
But we are not to worry. As Grandmother used to say
catching my face disfigured by rage, fear or spite,
'One day the wind'll change. You'll stay that way.'
...
It's an all-night hotspot: The Submarine.
I've gatecrashed on a circling of the damned 
beneath the polar ice. Yes, it's a dream
but whose? With telly-goggled eyes 
the lads lounge, able-bodied. It's the boredom 
they've been smoking leaks that greyish haze 
in strained air. There's a treble hiss 
above a hushed bass drumming. (Don't disturb 
the neighbours. It could be the death of us.)
Above each bunk, taped to the metal wall,
pink Pets spill tits; an airbrushed bum 
pouts peachy as a ripe split world. 
A smoke wisp drifts through a bulkhead door
sketching a girl in a shrink-wrap dress, 
bruised eyes, a morning-sickness pallor,
and fades like the ghost she's already become 
on shore, haunting some married quarters.
Biceps like bags of wet cement, tattooed MUM, 
a cropped boy cracks his knuckles and yawns 
so close I can study the zit that bugged him 
shaving. Missiles itch in their tubes. One 
of these days, we'll see who's dreaming.
A Few Words For Walt Whitman
Too much, all that booming and brawling. When I tried to speak your lines 
I stumbled in them. Jostled in the ranks, I couldn't stop or follow.
I wouldn't consent to the big sweaty bear hug of your voice. All too much, 
the sour physical tang of it, smoke, ether, blood, all that “old mad joy”.
Now I'm writing this, small, in a small black notebook. I'm often afraid. 
If I glimpse you at all, it's through the breaches between words 
when both sides falter, facing for a moment not each other but... 
(You observed this yourself: “not a gun was fired - all was petrified - 
it was more solemn and awful then all the roar and slaughter.”
Here you come, big man, dresser of wounds, clumsy lover of all this, 
just when I need you, through the rubble that might turn out to be anywhere, 
between canvas stretchers in a tent, between bleeps in the Cardiac Ward 
when the monitor stutters, then weeps, where we can't choose but meet, 
all the tongues of the world thrown down around us and what's left to say?
What This Hand Did
This is the one. This is the hand
that made a castle in the sand. 
When the tide turned present to past 
this hand tried to hold it fast.
When drops trickled through its grip 
this hand let the moment slip.
When the hour was getting late 
this hand reached out for its mate. 
When that touch was no relief 
two hands tangled in their grief.
When grief was too much to bear 
two hands wrung themselves in prayer. 
When the prayer had been ignored 
one hand fastened on a sword. 
When its knuckles went bone white 
this hand carved up wrong and right. 
When the laws began to twist 
this hand made an iron fist. 
When the laws began to break 
this hand grabbed what it could take. 
When the whole world's banks went bust 
this hand scratched the moon for dust. 
When the seasons came undone 
this hand tried to forge the sun. 
When that sun began to rise 
this hand tried to shield its eyes.
This hand. This one.
What has it done? What has it done?
Threads
Yes, but what about the spiders? There'll be no 
sheds, pelmets, crannies under stairs,
no room for supercargo
in the bunkers, whose conditioned air
will certainly exclude flies. Where will they go?
Seven years' bad luck, to kill a spider.... (Yes,
just one.) How many species of Arachnidae,
how many money-spinners,
mummy-swaddlers, house-guests, high-
wire-walkers, air-fishers, scuttlers, secret sharers?
How many threads to pick up? A small brocaded bead
sewn into her work, she makes the pattern
new each day, Eve's-
dropper, baglady, common-or-garden
Dame Diademata. She taps into tingling wires to read
all the news that's fit to eat. She's a radio astronomer
sifting the hum of space; here's the slight
bleat of a quasar, 
the crumpling of a sun, a distant Try
Try Try Again...
Today, a first stiffening of the air
and the webs touched in white on the privet... Such 
glass bead games, such Honiton lace, 
such moon dust. 
But empty: the pattern was lost 
for this year, at least. They would crumble at my touch.
from The Air Mines of Mistila
to Sylvia Kantaris
with thanks for the game 
Marked Route
'What tour could be complete
without a glimpse of them? Mistila's mountain air
has been mined immemorially. The miners, it is known,
can breathe no other. In our thriving cities of the plain
they die. It was to protect this folk our President-
For-Life set up the Reservation.
What heart of stone would not stir
to see the lone air-miner in the dawn, setting foot
to the sheer rock wall, not to return for weeks, or ever?
Or to catch, as you depart, the glimmer of their scattered
camp fires or, faint in the wind, their old laments
that are untranslatable and without end.
They may approach, or speak.
Take care. Their language sounds like ours
yet has different meanings. They may woo your camera
for small gifts. It is not advisable to leave your car.
This brochure is approved by the Military Council.
Keep to the marked route. Enjoy your stay.'
The page twitched into flame,
no warmth. Stone-dark. Chill pricklings of stars.
And absences of stars, that were mountains, trees or...
One spoke: 'You are lost.' 'Help me. Where is my car?'
'They have towed it away already. That is over. Come...'
There was a goat-hair blanket, human smells. 'Where
are you taking me?' 'Nowhere. You are here.'
That night their breath warmed me.
The next, I ranted. They brought green bitter tea.
The next, I tried silence. Someone burred a jew's harp
out into the dark. The next, I could not sleep. 'Xencha!'
a grin beneath bushbaby eyes piped: 'Me!' She told me
stories. I could have been the child.
How a man struck a vein of air so pure
he forgot himself and turned sculptor. With his treasure
in a goatskin bag, he left for the plain. In a roadside bar,
the show: it hung for a moment, an intricate nothing in the fug,
then dissolved from the edges. They stoned him. 'Xencha?
Is this true?' 'True? Yes! For me...'
How an old man cuts deep, deeper shafts
in higher mountains, which is why he grows weary
in the body, climbing back. How they come on nubs of thunder,
thin strata of human cries, the wingbeats of extinct condors
fossilised in air. ('Yes,' frowns Xencha, 'you are learning
but not perfect. Say not they, but we.')
A Passing
Jasta is gone.
Tomorrow we will feed 
his body to the air.
We are weaving his cradle.
Tonight there is haste.
He went without a word
watching for his dole
of cactus porridge, the ladle
dripping. He forgot
so many little things
he will be sure to miss
when he arrives. So Xencha
little one must run
being young and supple-
soft to squirm through openings
to small for sense.
We sway her in a circle.
We rock her from arm to arm.
This is the Hive of Ghosts;
we swathe her in a nasal hum
till her big eyes close. 'Now,
little meltwater minnow,
run!' her mother whispers.
'Overtake the old one
on the steep track.
Remind him of our names.
Say we sigh good air for him.
Say his goats go well. And say
here are his tools, the noun
'whetstone', the verb 'to sprag'.
Also 'dirigible' and 'flimflam':
he will want to play.
Give him his treasure.
Then, oh watch for the way
and the footing, hurry back.'
Unsurely, Xencha stands
as if for blind man's buff.
She threads a maze between 
no obstacles to where he lies.
She folds into his hands
his nickel-plated key ring
with the ritual words 
worn smooth by fingering:
FORD MOTORS.
With it, he used to say, 
if he had not mislaid the key, 
he would open all our doors. 
If we had doors.
Dr Crampfold's Complaint
Dear Sirs, While sensible of the trust your august institution has reposed 
in me
I have to report that my contribution to the World Digest of Critical 
Socio-philology
will be delayed. My expenses here are nil, as are my findings. This - can 
one strictly call
it a community? - has nothing one might properly term a custom. I have 
explained to them that all
known cultures have such things. They express surprise, or interest (or are 
simply polite)
and say 'You are a great professor of this. Teach us. May we do a custom 
this very night?'
Their dialect appears a hybrid of the common tongue and an uncommon 
desire to confound.
'Our roots are in the air,' they say. 'The leaves reach the earth and brush it
 with a speaking sound.'
The deep structure of their grammar resembles the labyrinth of shafts, 
mostly disused,
that litter these slopes. 'The wind,' they say, 'strays into them and cries 
aloud, confused,
like a hundred whales.' They have never seen a whale. They have forty 
words for a certain bean
they never eat. 'Forty beans make only wind,' they say. 'Please tell us 
what we mean.'
Lishka and The Chief of Police 
There she sat, hawking her nothings in my market square
among the goat-butchers, grog-shops, lentil-dumpling-
vendors (crooks to a man but at least they sell something
if only a hangover). Why had nobody reported her?
'Why?' I shouted. They shuffled and muttered. She sat,
empty-handed, bare legs in the dust. Of course... No-
where but in this gopher-hole would men stoop so low,
to touch one of them. 'Take her away,' I spat.
'Where, Sir? The jail has fallen down.' I had her shut 
in the one safe house. My own. There she would see my gun,
my brass medal (from the old regime), see I was someone
not to be snubbed with that dumb blue stare. 'Slut!'
I cried. 'What do you charge them for your... services?'
She emptied her bag: six beans, a nail, some amber wax,
a penny whistle... 'Each pays with what they have.
So will you.' 'Hussy! Don't forget whose house this is!
When my wife comes from the city she will smell the smell.
Go wash. Make yourself decent. ' I never meant... But there 
she stood, in night-sky black, see pearls for stars - 
my mother's mourning dress. I slapped her and she fell 
across the bed. 'Bitch!' As I straddled her, curiously 
numb, I was high, breathless, near vertigo, hacking away
at something cold but insubstantial. It gave. As I came
I lost my grip. I fell. I would fall for ever. 'Help me...'
stretched from my lips. I clutched about to find her
gone. Only the black dress, stained, torn, rumpled.
And a tapping at the locked door: 'Sir? Is there struggle?
Please, what are my orders? What has become, Chief Sir?'
A Perfect Match
Dear Father Superior, Do not believe
the salivations of the Press. The good souls of Mistila 
are attached remarkably, I almost said religiously, 
to what we must call marriage. They do it again and again.
No, don't misunderstand. Monogamy
is, in their phrase, 'the only serious way to play.'
The bond is neither carnal love, nor rank, nor property
but what Crampfold terms the Principle of Mutual Astonishment
which has to be demonstrated once a year.
Folk converge from miles off for 'a good match'. Nor
are they mere spectators, for they hoot and jeer
at predictable gestures. Infidelity is slow-hand-clapped.
At the least hint of collusion the match
is declared null and void. Some couples play safe:
long silence punctuated by a few non-sequiturs, much
like marriage elsewhere. In the olden days, I am told,
weddings were truly gladiatorial affairs.
Fatalities were not unknown. One famous bride-to-be
staged the spectacular illusion of a funeral pyre where-
in she hurled herself to inflame her beau's ardour
with pre-emptive suttee. Duly stupefied,
he leaped into the flames she had spoken out of air;
he tripped on a boulder, cracked his head and died.
'But beautifully,' the old ones shake their heads and sigh.
The rematch I witnessed was tame
by these standards. He brought a ripple from the crowd 
with his juggling with starfish, blindfold. All the same,
her Maori oaths seemed a trifle studied. At the end
something more seemed called for. I
stepped forward, sprinkling from my little phial
of holy water. The crowd erupted, lifting us head high,
the three of us, and declared us most astonishingly wed.
I have tried to explain my vows.
They slap their thighs and roll about and cry, 'Too much!
The game is over!' What am I supposed to do? And how?
Father, I stand in mortal need of your advice.'
Alys, Wife of the Chief of Police
My love came from the mountains
He has done me right and wrong
I know not him nor yet my child
My time will not be long
Dusk. The village draws into itself, and apart:
here, a lit window; there, a door opens and shuts;
a child is shushed; dogs yap from yard to tard
and someone is singing. Alys stands. She would be
a shadow if she could, the long black shawl 
across her face. If Max passed now, he would see 
nobody, another peasant. But hush, that song...
So dark he stood at the courtyard gate
The wind wiped away his song
A drink, he begged, my throat is dry
I shall not hold you long
Maxwell had knelt once. 'Be my First Lady. A Chief
of Police is a somebody. His wife is a somebody else.'
The jeep could run her into town. Do not lose your chic, 
he said. And later: don't spend your time with nobodies. 
Except on official occasions. Do not be seen without a hat. 
Now he was out at pistol practise. She could hear the peevish 
peck of his gun up the hillside. And that song...
There's nowhere in the world, he said
Our baby will belong
But I'll return the day he's born
And take my child along
Behind that wall would be a garden, and a slim girl 
singing her heart out straight to the sky. The Alys-
shadow peeped. There, by an iron mangle was a terrible 
gross woman lading washing. As she slapped a shirt 
and trousers off the stone. a brief male outline dried 
away. The pistol-swats had stopped. As Alys turned
for home the hag threw back her head; a pure voice sang...
Now the night comes from the mountains
And I know not right nor wrong
Where is my love? Where is my child?
My time will not be long.
The Last Sight of Xencha
'What's a story when there's no-one left to listen?'
She tosses the question into a mossy adit
like a stone. 'I am,'
says a voice. She peers in. At the fringe of light
sits a man of no colour; hair, beard, skin,
even his eyes are white.
'Uncle! I thought I'd made you up. So you're true!'
Far below, yellow excavators flense the hill. 
The wan man nods, 'And you?
All this is finished. Go to the plain. Down there
those eyes of your will serve you well,
whereas here...' She stares
into the dark a long time, then 'Uncle? Can you sing?
Do you dance? No? Then I'll teach you. Wait...'
she bobs back, 'One more thing.'
By a rusty stream, she fills her bowl to the brim.
She leaves her reflection in it.
Then she follows him.
The Dancing
'Once upon a time, there was a savage tribe
who danced for rain. Danced, maybe days, maybe
weeks. Some fell exhausted. In the end, what joy:
the rains! Now, we know that it always rains there
every month or two. Always has, always will.
But could it be they just liked dancing?'
from The Case Of Thomas Prote
Last Entry.
Prote. Thomas Prote. The missing man.
We have a date. Approximate location.
The survey ship Prometheus. And a journal
in his own trim punctilious hand:
'Left Ascension Island. Some rain. 
Wednesday 3rd October, 1879.'
Chaste facts, no gossip, no emotion.
'Work interrupted. Small typhoon.'
We have his findings. As the dredge
brought up its thimblefuls of sludge 
for his microscope, he sketched it all,
diatoms mainly, page on page
of crystalline geometries,
a silt of snowflakes, every one 
a death. Then, three months out 
he lets a new word slip: 'a lovely
specimen!' And gradually his hand 
betrays a change. Soon he admits 
the pronoun I. With so much 
emptiness around him, he expands 
until: 'Landfall! Such scenes 
of Gothick desolation. Near the island 
what might seem at first a tide race 
parts to our bows and reveals 
itself a multitude of creatures, 
chasing hither and thither, seemingly 
in pure delight. At dusk 
the penguins, for such they are, 
throng the rocks, where they raise 
a weird unceasing wailing. One dives, 
hundreds follow, marking the dark sea 
with phosphorescent trails.
Tomorrow, at first light, we land...'
Then is only the empty page 
they say he stared at afterwards, 
for here the entries end.
Among the Snake Worshippers of Brazil
(The Wide World Magazine, September 1899)
The beastly stench! The brazen gleam of sweat!
In that torment of drums,
more rainstorm than rhythm, dark flesh grew bright.
Some jabbered in tongues,
in shrill macaw voices. Some wrestled serpents,
slow as circus strongmen 
bending iron bars. One clutched a wriggling 
rooster with no head
like an uncorked wineskin. Then he, the preacher
in a frock coat tattered 
like a fringe of seaweed strode towards me.
He was stooped and lean
and white! 'Brother,' he cried, wiping steam 
from his thin wire spectacles.
'What shame brings you here? Blood on your hands?
I say unto you:
all that is living wades in gore and excrement.
Many fall, few rise.
But see...' A mulatto woman staggered, rigid,
backwards into many arms,
a snake snug to her throat. 'This one 
is in the Little Death.
She is perfect. Her soul is a tabula rasa,
washed in the Blood...'
But for the blot of it that clung to his palm
the way he shook my hand
we might have been meeting on a Sunday afternoon
at his club in the Strand...
A Coffee House in Murrenstrand, 1929
'Leben? Uberleben! To live over and above. Mere man 
merely lives. The Ubermensch survives!'
Gusts from the sea
shovelled rain on the glass. The Professor 
broke his words like bread. Nobody stirred 
but his two hench-boys: Rudi
with a flush of acne and the ghost 
of Trotsky's beard, the young berserker Bruno,
Left and Right,
wolfhound and mastiff, each slavering inside 
but still leashed to their master. With small 
wire glasses, smaller eyes,
his hair gone pale as if scorched at the roots,
he was never seen to eat, or fed on self-neglect
like a saint. He paced 
and preached: 'Master Darwin might blench 
at the great Coming he foreshadows...' 'Yes,
the Proletariat!' 'The Race!'
The dog boys chimed their discord. 'Children,
children...' he was chuckling through the crash
of splintered chairs. Next day
on the strand, they were at heel. A paperchase
of gulls came heckling; one by one they dropped
and strutted in his train.
The Professor stooped to toss them crusts 
like pearls of wisdom, with the lordliness
of pure disdain.
From On Why Books Be An Abomination And An Instrument Of The Devil All Excepting The Good Book What Is Not The Work Of Human Hands
How you may ask came a poor unletterd chap as I
on such speckilations. Near seventy years since I went cabin boy 
on board I think The Promise Thus. Never did discover 
what port we were bound but sailed in circles nowhere 
for months and in Godforsaken latitudes but what 
I do recall is we had as supercargo a young Mister Pratt.
There was a scholar mad for his books I always said
and was I not shewn right soon enough they turned his head.
On Rookery Island it was we put ashore all stones 
it was but in the midst huge grass in tussocks overgrown 
prodigious from the droppings of many birds I suppose.
But master Pratt says he must see his self and in he goes.
All day we waits till Captain swears profane Damned Booby 
lost his self and picks me being small for the search party.
All a maze it were inside all overhung and every inch 
thick with nests and droppings birds and eggs and chicks
all screaming every time you put your foot and the smell 
like a fishwifes vomit pardon me and like to souls in Hell 
birds slashing at our knees youd not believe those beaks 
like cutlasses and in our ears that endless torment shriek.
We backd out quick and took a tot to fortify us then 
we built a fire and waited. After dark then very sudden 
the grass crashd apart he stumbled out there he stood 
all trembling like in a rage and up to the waist in blood 
egg stuff and stinking but his eyes like Moses come 
down from the mountain. From then he was mad and dumb.
Translated
Egg drool in warm fat
clouding, and the yolk a wrinkled sun; 
in it, a smudge-speck, a comma of blood:
the scene of the crime,
while on the radio a spruce voice scrapes this
from the empty barrelof the Falklands war:
how an Argentine landing party 
on an unclaimed islet came upon 
a young man, curiously whiskered and in tatters 
not of uniform but of a frock coat.
He had been dead, it seemed, for no time, 
lying at his ease in a makeshift nest of tussock grass
and looking, if a poor
translation can be trusted, 'as if he had fallen 
out of one dream straight into another...'
The Painter of the Lake
He slaps a quick grey drench 
across the sky. As it weeps 
he works his colours in, 
old man with misty glasses 
and a little box of tricks
that folds out neat bright tinctures. 
A crowd begins to gather, shyly:
children, dogs, then half 
the village at a little distance. 
Our lake, our two mountains. 
He gives them back to us
perfect. Every Sunday afternoon. 
He makes them as they are. 
He washes out his brushes 
in the lake, which is why 
it keeps its blue-green-grey, 
year in, year out.
Only today
he has not come. Instead 
your coach arrives scattering 
the goats. Your faces gaze 
from its green-smoked glass 
like carp. Our children 
find their own reflections 
in your hubcaps. But 
the painter? Is he ill? 
Oh, if he dies 
what will you make of us?
In the Foothills of Synaesthesia
'Zyvrosht,'
they say. The woman hews a slice.
Many shadowy children, aunts and farmhands watch.
He hesitates:
Bread? She frowns, then slips it 
to him like a kindness. 'Nja. Zyvrosht!' It has the taste 
of the first bread ever.
Now she tips a stone jug, nodding:
'Oshru.' The sounds trickle through his fingers.
He has said too much 
and made no sense. They shake their heads
and pat him and leave him alone. He listens to the dust 
in the village square,
The clatter of sunlight on the cracked tiles,
the flicker of a boy's voice down the ochre track to where 
quick syllables of glitter
spell 'lake' for no-one else to hear.
He names each sight out loud. A rust-and-scarlet tractor 
far off ticks and ticks,
iambic, almost English, up and down. 
He scans a leather-bound hillside, patiently unzipped 
in long crumbling lines 
that speak to him: 'homewards'... 'plod...'
they say dimly. Or the lea. Even 'God', for the rhyme, 
but 'zipstich...?'
Do the seagulls, like smoke rising
in the tractor's wake, really 'cleek'? With a twitch 
he's awake. Beside 
his bed, the youngest daughter bends, 
as if reading him, all his strangeness writ large in her eyes.
'You brought me back'
(How can he say it? ) 'I was miles away.'
(Her eyebrows quirk.) 'Tractor? You know? Trak trak...?'
He mimes the up, down,
up of it. 'Cut wheat? Zipsticher? No?'
She is backing away, her blue eyes darkening to brown. 
'Zyvrosht!' Said, 
done. She sparkles, runs, returns 
triumphant, all the family with her, and a slice of bread.
House of Paper
A low table. Two cushions. Two 
cups set. And no-one here but me 
in a room with no walls, 
only thin paper screens, 
paper screens beyond screens 
hung from ceiling to floor. Light
moves in and is moved among them 
from I don't know where. 
If I'm the guest 
I'm unannounced or uninvited. 
Say I'm the host...? 
As if a door opened somewhere
a rustling spreads. Almost
a whisper. I can almost hear.
4.
THE SON OF THE DUKE OF NOWHERE
(1987-1991)
Welcome To The Forest
for HD, at 36 
So here it is: the walled-up door 
only visible at certain 
shifts of light, the door the stories
mentioned. Now it opens
for you; one step and you're somewhere 
else. That cats-and-cabbage smell, 
the murk, the sinking 
underfoot, the rising damp you feel 
in your bones say: this is 
it, not a figure of speech, this is all 
the forest there is. Here's an armchair 
unbuttoned like Falstaff, 
a snakepit of bedsprings, some lovers'
burst balloon, a single 
small red welly and a dumped Cortina 
drifted deep in leaf-mould. You're just 
passing through? That's 
what they all said. And you're almost 
sure of the path until 
it twists again. And whom do you trust:
the woodman whistling through his teeth
as he buffs up his axe?
Or the wolf-boy who comes sidling out 
to lay a clutch of pignuts 
and a snared thrush dumbly at your feet?
Away From It All
He tried to write home
again, then crunched in the mist down the shingle, 
out past the pillbox burying itself backwards 
like a crab. He went stooped
as if hunting the one perfect globe of a stone
that must exist somewhere. The sea got up uncombed 
with a scurf of rusty scud 
and polystyrene. He was listening for the stream 
that would burst up through the pebbles with a roar 
come Spring, the locals said. 
Even they had been making themselves scarcer 
like the hours of daylight. The only trace 
of any other life was the mould
on the mixed-fruit jam, 'Five Go To Devil's Island'
and a book of crosswords, half-done, wrong. 
The gas had puttered out
days since with a whiff of fish. He lay in silence 
scoured by the all-night traffic of the waves
and woke to a shudder of flight, 
was it, once, overhead, then the flat wonk 
of a goose come adrift from its squadron. 
He had wanted to write
'I'm as free as the wind here, nothing to distract 
me from... from...' The paper stayed as blank 
as the mist that shifted blind 
on blind, and suddenly was alive with nothing 
he could see: a quivering hum, a slap of tackle, 
whickering taut wires... 
A flock of white sails beat by, white-blind, 
feeling their way home along the shore.
Son of Snotnose
tattnina (Estonian): a small oil lamp, literally 'snotnose'
There's a smutty flicker
on two crescent faces:
one, a woman hauled up
in her ninth month; one, a maid 
who fusses at the wick
that drips, drips. 
'Stop your cackling, child!'
In the stung hush 
something up the hillside 
crackles and spits 
like brushwood 
catching fire. Now again 
a lumbering crunch. 
The flame jinks. Then 
'It's stopped.' Across the yard 
hens ruffle and subside. 
'What now?' Drip 
drip. They're still, 
so still 
that when the door kicks wide 
it's he who hangs amazed, 
the enemy, the uninvited 
guest, swaying in 
towards their light, 
one fist half raised
but trembling, rifle 
slung askew, that shallow 
Tartar face... A boy, 
half way to dead and knows it, 
and how many miles 
from home. No one 
can move. He stares and stares 
till the thud of a shell 
rattles the shutters. 
Then he ducks and runs. 
A wrenched hinge creaks. 
The squat flame trips 
in the draught. 
The snotnose drips. 
When the woman speaks 
it's a rusty whisper: 'Quick. 
Get water. Wedge the door. 
Help me.' It is 1919 
and not much else is clear. 
'And for God's sake trim that wick.'
The Duke of Nowhere
I was the son of the Duke of Nowhere. 
Nowhere was home. The first sound I remember
was engines sawing steam, the butt 
and squeal of waggons full of clunk 
shunted cruelly. Lifted to the window sill 
I had my first sight of our exile 
as I thought: Here, me, 
watching... There, trains, going away...
He was living incognito
but his secret was safe with me. 
I was the solitary heir to everything 
he never once mentioned. I guessed 
from his brooding, his whole silent days, 
it must be vast. The lost estates 
grew vaster in the weeks, 
then months, he went away and stayed. 
Beyond the roofs, beyond the dockyard wall 
were cranes, then the edge of the world. 
On a clear day I could watch grey frigates 
climb it and slip over. I woke one night 
to singing in the streets that suddenly 
grew small as all the hooters of the fleet 
brawled up together, blurting 
Home.... as if any such place
existed, over the horizon, anywhere. 
Lahti
1.
... the child won't sleep, 
does it to spite us, you'd think 
there was no-one in the whole world but him, 
even when we're alone 
what do we do but argue about him, 
we never just sit and not talk now, we can't begin, 
and that's without the endless 
calling - 'Just this once...' - night 
after night - 'I'll never ask again...' - the same lie, 
we put a stop to that but now 
he creeps, the child gets out and prowls, 
just when we get quiet on the sofa there's a creak on the stairs, 
that's why I keep the wireless on, 
Light Programme, but I hear, I can't stop myself 
listening, thinking Where is he now? God knows where it'll end...
2.
There are no wolves in England. 
Not on the landing 
or the long downstairs. 
Not in the kitchen 
where the lino glistens 
like dark ice.
Not in the yard 
behind the toolshed 
or the toilet door. 
There's nothing 
in the shadows of the trees 
but shadows. 
Everybody knows 
the wolves are gone, 
gone limping 
off across the snow
so far from anywhere. 
However many 
there may seem to be 
each one sits singly 
and their howls 
only lengthen the night between them. 
3.
It was built like a miniature Odeon 
in wood veneer. It had a cheeky dial 
that blushed when it was on. The grille 
at the back showed valves that hummed 
in their own dimmed cathedral glow. 
Uncle Mac's Children's Favourites was OK 
but when no-one was looking I tuned to Lahti
and caught the sound of snow 
or sometimes a faint howling. Night 
after night I haunted the landing. A band 
of warmth would glow under the door 
I never could open. I thought they might 
pick up the signal. But I was too far 
north, in Lahti. They were in some private 
south with Perry Como. Magic Moments, 
he sang. Catch a Falling Star...
Saying When
Was it then, as we stopped by the river
watching our charmed blur shiver off downstream 
towards the crushed sound of the weir?
Was it then that the world 
became less than it was: she died, 
in a room above deep gardens that grew wild 
by night, the houses dark beyond, a postage stamp 
of window lit maybe to frame 
a single head, a lamp?
Was that when one more country became nowhere 
on the map, with its cafes, its spas 
weeping condensation, its grey commissionaires 
in chocolate coats with stiff gold tassels? 
Uniforms were innocent as plumage, 
years piled lightly as the flakes of strudels 
she force-fed guest... Those, and powdery
moon-shaped biscuits, sinister 
with almonds. 'Let the boy eat!'
she would cry. She had a sweet decaying smell, 
cut flowers. 'Let him eat while he can. 
Who can tell?'
Was it then, 
when all at once you shivered, 
'Let's go home'? Or when 
a haze off the river rose up like a swan 
into our headlights? I swerved but it was nothing 
and no sooner seen than gone. 
Envoi
for S.M.K. - 11.9.88
There was a high green after-sunset 
like an empty picture-palace 
dimming to a glow 
before the main feature. 
Nothing. Space. 
And the hills folding in for the night
and a small plane 
rising, an X-
marks-the-spot silhouette
that dissolved 
between one glance and the next, 
the wing lights moving on. 
It was nothing to do with you, 
no sign, no metaphor. 
It was nothing beyond 
itself: a small 
plane rising as down in the dark 
I watched and you 
were dead. But for a moment 
it seemed clear: there was space 
to hold us. That was all. 
I would have liked to tell you. 
A Summit
Slovenia, 1987
Miles down, the Jesenice steelworks broils 
but we find last year's snow still dossing 
wrapped in pine-mess, a tramp in a sack. 
The trees all wear hair shirts of lichen. 
A cloud moves through the wood. Dull bells 
of drop-eared sheep nod by. A cuckoo 
mocks itself. Somewhere up in the mist 
is a line where the mountains trade names 
like small change. There's a frontier post 
and peaked caps, but the cloud slips through. 
In a roadside hut, the man behind the bar 
pilots his radio dial to catch the news 
in any of five languages. All are scrambled 
by a sound like crumbling scree. Too 
far above it all, our reception is poor. 
Out in the woods, the ants are building empires, 
ziggurats of dead wood, towers of Babel. 
They only need a flagpole; I plant my stick. 
Hundreds swarm up. At the top they wave 
then blunder back, wagging antennae: Brothers, 
turn back! There has been some mistake...
What the Mountain Saw
They arrive by night, travel-stunned, and see nothing. 
They sleep wrapped in pine-tang and the rush of waters. 
The father is first awake. He clacks the shutters back 
and a mountain squats square at the window, looking in. 
It never leaves them, though it changes hour by hour, 
twisting a scarf of cloud, or turning a hard profile 
to the morning sun, or dissembling a sugar-pink haze. 
However far they walk - and they walk, walk every day - 
it's above them, a bit of beyond. Some snow hangs on 
in shreds. This is a famous north face, and a killer. 
Each day the father scans it with his old binoculars 
for any hint of tracks, and never finds them. 
So the holiday proceeds, in a series of snapshots, 
here, in mid-stride, he crests a rise, wife and child 
at his boot-heels, tranced by their thud and the heat 
and insect hum. But the snow-face is no nearer. 
Here, through veils of spruce, he breaks into a glade 
possessed by pallid green-veined hellebores.
Or here, he brings his family, breathless, to its knees 
before one icicle-white wild crocus. Here is the lake 
he finds them, like a souvenir, round and still 
enough to hold the mountain, till a fish jumps. 
In between, there are the hours he drives them on 
for health. Stop too long, the sweat begins to chill. 
'Breathe deep!' he cries, and strikes out higher 
up a wide white stony stream bed, tumbled and scoured 
by the spring melt, strewn with tree trunks, torn 
and bleached, and a few tiny tough mauve flowers 
he can't name. He grips the child's hand as she teeters 
on a plank beneath a waterfall. Its ice breath touches them. 
Their hair goes white with spray. Afterwards he will say 
'That was our furthest point,' and sigh. As they drag home 
footsore, the mountain shows itself again behind them 
in its pure dream of itself, untouched... Just as now 
it looks in through the breakfast-room window when the child, 
as if the strings that control her had fouled 
and were jerked tight, has one of her turns. An egg 
tips from its silver cup, a glass pirouettes to the edge 
but has not yet smashed, the other guests have not 
yet turned to stare, the father reaches for her but 
is frozen. He will never reach her. Any moment now 
the yolk will burst on crisply laundered linen. Soon 
there will be splinters and tears. Behind it all he sees 
the mountain at the window. If one could stand there 
looking down, he thinks, this would all be very small. 
Petit Mal
Just a flutter 
behind your eyes,
a swirl of snow
that melts at a touch 
and you wonder why I ask
Where did you go?
What happened?
'Nothing,' you say.
It's nothing, true:
a tiny death?
a leaving home?
Who knows? Not you.
Not the feverish script 
writ by the moving 
finger of the EEG. 
Not the maze-mandalas, 
shadow-maps, 
that are all I see 
in the brain-scan 
negatives. No trace 
of the gusts of flight 
or free fall 
I've felt brush 
past me to light 
wing-quivering 
on your skin, as if 
to mark you out. So 
slight. So hard 
to hold you. Harder still 
to let you go.
The Dancing Princesses
It was an age of ballgowns: antique whims 
she dredged up barnacled with gems. 
Day in, day out she drew them, her exquisite 
dummies. How could they dance? Hands and feet 
were afterthoughts. And their perfectly lovely 
empty faces last of all, their eyes only 
for her. Unfluttering, they stared her through 
and through. They would not let her go 
till they'd taken one year of her ten. 
Then something hidden by the gowns began 
to connect, hand to foot. To move, before 
my eyes. To dance. We are not what we were. 
No more king, no princesses... The last 
of her line furls a billow of scarlet, 
quick as something going up in flames. 
And there, arm locked to her waist, 
is a thin man, all in black, 
stiff as a stake. His back 
is to me. I can't see his face. 
On The Hoof
Sweet musk
of sweat and chips and petrol. 
Sunglassed cabin cruisers lie
at anchor like a sneer of perfect teeth. 
The waves slope off
smudging fingerprints of diesel. 
One last toddler pokes 
in a pickle of weed
collecting bits of crab 
to build one of his own and 
Shark, mummy, shark!
A stiff 
rubbery cosh 
of a dogfish, ditched, 
too small for sport or meat. 
The child is smacked.
The gulls come sidling. 
Now
the front lights up. I cruise 
the menus. I approve 
the mushroom quiche and salads 
you and I might choose
together, then move down 
to the Char-Grill Bar-B-Q. 
I've got to eat 
and fast. Tonight 
two hundred miles from home
I feel like meat. 
The Big Bang Disco flickers. 
It's a heart 
that suddenly begins to beat. 
The lads are all edgy with style. 
The girls wear hungry midriffs 
bare this year. A bouncer 
with a knuckleduster jawline 
counts them in
and they're skittish but meek 
to his touch: warm bodies, 
shuffling feet, 
nudging on down the narrowing chute
the way flesh does:
not grass, but meat.
Heavy Weather 
Close. Close as undergrowth. 
The air a sweaty animal 
that rubbed up against us. Nudged 
between us. Close. We tossed 
side by side all night, waiting 
for something to break. Couldn't touch 
for the heat. Even the thunder 
kept its distance. Limply 
I offered a joke: 'the drums,
the drums...' But you were asleep. 
Or pretending. Teasy spats of rain 
came and went and couldn't 
clear the air. We woke exhausted. 
Peeled on clothes that felt rubbery-
damp. Thought: Now what? Went our ways. 
The weather does it. All at once 
all over town, cracks in pavements, patios and walls 
boiled over: a thin greasy froth of wings. 
The ants rose groggily, fumbling each other in flight, 
each pair a fantastical flying machine 
of sex that came crashing down. The neuter groundcrew
scrambled. I knelt to watch one queen 
on our doorstep, dragging her slim spent male 
in the wake of her chariot, still coupled. 
They had begun dismantling him. One clutched a wing 
overhead in the scrum, like a papery fan
or a dubious bargain from a jumble sale. 
An Incident on the Line
near Dawlish
It's the same wet week, the length of England. 
Each glistening station-stop depletes a few 
till just three of us loll - half doze, half daze. 
We've left our face unattended. A cardboard cup 
has been rolling to and fro, tick 
tock, since Taunton. There's a thin girl opposite 
who sits so tight, the cords of her throat 
make an angle with her collarbones. 
Her magazine stays shut. She bites her lip 
in her sleep; in sleep, her man expands, 
his bare arm drapes her like a boa. 
Fields of flood slip by where cows and swans 
dip into their own reflections. 
Dusk draws up mud flats like velvet drapes 
to part them in one swish: night 
laced with grapplings of foam. Spray 
jounces along the sea wall; a slap of it 
smacks the window, combs itself away 
in kite-tails, bright milky shudderings. 
The slumped man grunts; he shifts his weight 
on the girl. Her eyes open - she's not slept - 
to stare over his head, out, where the next 
wave bunches and swings for us. 
She's learning not to flinch. At no-one 
I can see, she almost smiles.
Dust 
Here they come, made of books, made of skin, 
dancing into the breach 
between us. They're common as dirt: the least 
subspecies of the order Angel. Poor things. 
Sunlight uplifts them. 
All they want to do is drift and praise
but we bother the air
with our clinches and tiffs like electrical storms. 
See how they twitch. 
Now I sit and will them: peace, be still. 
Your mug of cooling tea 
gives up its ghosts. The door slams; bright 
concentric ripples run 
into, and shudder through, each other's arms. 
How do weightless 
creatures mate? Just now, frisking a cobweb
idly I brought down 
on my head a slow crumbling cloud. 
On its crest something stiff 
and silvered surfed at me: the bodiless 
leg-chassis of a spider. 
As I flinched, it followed, drawn 
by more than gravity - 
the clutch of an old woman in the crowd 
with something she just has to tell me. 
The Way We Are
1.
No secrets. Half our lives
together now... There's nothing between us 
left unsaid, nothing except... 
I can't say. If I could 
I would pen you a flawless poem, of no lines, 
only spaces. This isn't it. 
2.
A purple flush, almost 
a weed... It's not till it stiffens 
and parches, going to seed,
that we prize it. tastefully
arranged. Its inscrutable ricepaper face, 
snuffed lanterns, tethered kites
fret in a draught too slight
for us to feel, with an itchy sound. 
Dry, everlasting. Honesty. 
3.
So here was are, as if 
we had climbed and climbed, on a twisting
and backsliding scree track, up 
through hours of mist
to stop
and stand together 
at what might be 
a crumbling drop - no guide, no view
and not a word to say. 
4.
There's a structural fault. Surveyors
frown: 'I'd have built somewhere else if I was you.'
Cracks, hairline fractures everywhere 
- in the tired skin of our eyelids, 
in the concrete of the yard where the children
do studious hopscotch (step on a line 
you're out!) while on the threshold
of another year I hesitate, with this dried bouquet 
and a modest proposal: shall we go on?
5.
We've plastered it, we've bodged. It opens new each year, 
a fine lightning track, ceiling to floor. 
It has become familiar 
as these creases in our palms, that fork and stutter 
and get crossed; strange voices will cut in,
bills, children, other 
calls on our time, squalls of interference. Then 
we hold this old crackling line of pain. 
It connects us again. 
6.
And if the crash comes? I expect 
to meet you in the rubble, half a brick 
in hand. Here's mine. Together we can build a crack...
Big Wheel 
I touched your hips; I felt your skeleton. 
My finger bones 
cupped the hinge of a thigh, the nub of it, so little 
flesh between. 
And there I was, in some museum, face to face 
with an exhibit, 'Human
Female and Infant' - the clean crib of her pelvis
empty and the oh-
so-narrow exit and the baby's cracked-egg dome, 
a perfect fit.
And I couldn't let go
like our fling together on the big wheel. Caged
in cheap thrills 
and girders and 100-watt bulbs, the kids screamed
tirelessly. We watched them 
reeling off, weak-kneed, falling into each other's arms. 
Twice their age, 
we dared each other to it. The man clinked us in
without smiling. Threw the switch. 
Heavy metal pumped suddenly, swung us up 
in one snatch, juddered,
stopped. We hung in a groundswell of dazzle and dark:
our big O glittering 
its own advertisement across the night, with us, slung 
between creaking bolts, holding on for dear life.
A Crumb
As you paused to flick away
one crumb, all you'd been saying, all 
I was about to say 
deserted me. I saw the tired 
skin - sand creased by a flash-flood
then parched - inside 
your elbow, in that place 
with no particular name. Erosion, 
grain by grain... I can't make 
you beautiful. It frightens me, 
how little we miss, so close. Not a crumb. 
What do you see
and not say, that I deceive myself I hide?
What love can't do 
is save us from ourselves, or from each other. 
All it can do is be true. 
6. 
I.D. 
(1991-1994)
Nocturne With Glue 
Listen, it's almost 
not a sound at all - 
the sound of 1 a. m.
It's peaceful 
as the glaze of water 
idling 
just above the waterfall. 
Somebody jets by 
with his sun roof open 
to the dark. He leaves a trail 
of disco funk 
like broken glass. I just know 
he'll have a sticker: Honk 
If You Had It Last Night. 
The binbags are out 
sleeping rough again, 
one with its mouth wide open. 
A thin finicky fox 
looks up 
from its spillage of takeaway cartons. 
It spares half a glance for me, 
half for the thin boy
by the bus stop going nowhere. 
He droops with the weight 
of his head in his hands. He sways 
as if combing the gutter 
for something he lost but 
what? He jerks round 
with a whimpering growl, 
he crouches, he snuffs deep 
from his polythene bag. 
It's a crumpled ego, a speech-
bubble saying Waitrose. 
The fox shifts gear 
smoothly, into fight-or-flight. 
Flit
Black cab under the arches
ticking, lights killed, 
engine drumming its fingers, 
sparks flicked from the driver's 
window like a lit fuse. 
Black cab under hire 
with its meter alive 
like a sanctuary lamp:
red numbers twitch 
in their sleep like dogs; 
at after-midnight rates 
they dream quick. I'm waiting 
to see someone emptied on the street 
in a downpour of send-offs 
like the last New Year's Eve 
of the century. Or creep 
downstairs with one 
case, the click of the latch 
a loaded gun 
cocked at too many years 
of silence. I'm still waiting. 
Is he out already 
in the back seat of the black cab
clinching deals of love or money
or alone with the thrill 
of watching time tot up 
to the last p?
Then he'll tap the glass 
and shake his wallet empty 
and be gone. Black cab, 
are you waiting for me?
Late
Someone was missing from my party. 
I couldn't see who 
as I slipped between everyone's glances 
like a ladder through a stocking, through 
to the back door and a breath of cold, 
blind for a moment, then 
in the crook of the crab-tree 
a shiver of twigs, a thin-limbed 
watchful child; it was me
looking back for a moment 
then away 
to where the plank gate 
winced on a hinge somebody 
should have fixed, into the lane 
where I wasn't to go alone.
The Tennis Court In Winter
Between T-section stakes
set in puddles of concrete
the ten-foot wire-knit fence breed spikes
of crystal fine as root hairs
that feed off the air.
Just a point on the gauge:
in too quiet a dawn
we wake to find a revolution happened overnight.
Now the simplest of things,
our faithful unassuming
water, has become fanatical,
pure as Robespierre,
a stickler for a million points of detail.
This tarmac pound 
becomes a parade ground
not yet trodden or a yard
where anybody serving time
might raise their eyes to see the wire barbed 
with brilliance, a moment, blind
to what, if anything's, beyond
Beyonders
They live like us, 
amongst us. Think of the years 
they watched our houselights 
from a distance. Now they're here, 
they'll always leave 40 watts wasting 
on the stairwell, or an anglepoise 
downcast on the desk at midnight. 
It's the same with their eyes:
you can see the bare filament 
quivering, you can hear the brittle whine 
like one mosquito in a lampshade 
that puts them in mind 
of the millions more that rise 
out of swamp pools in veils 
of cheap nylon that snag on your skin. 
For a moment they're back 
in the old beyond. Then 
Sorry, they'll say
a bit too casually. 
I was miles away... 
They speak like us but 
as if schooled in it later in life. 
Their mother tongue is silence 
only, when it falls, 
each looks away. 
Every one has a different dialect; 
how can they hope 
to reconstruct the histories they need? 
Of a land where someone's ancestors 
thrashed their grey herds to and fro 
beneath the skirts of mother Winter
ducking most of her wallops. 
Of a thousand-mile 
branch line leading nowhere 
but a barbed wire gate. Of days 
chunked from the frost 
and thawed by body heat. 
(They have cold burns to prove it.) 
Of some millennial 
construction project sinking into bog 
as steadily as it grows.
All lies. Besides 
they never speak of it. 
Don't ask me how I know. 
What won't they do
for a bit of your warm regard?
They'll take any amount 
and mail it home
except there's no address 
and no-one there
to take it in, 
not now or ever. 
Heard the one about the Boy 
Lost In The Snow? 
Ask any of them. They'll tell you. 
Winter granted him one gift: 
he could not die, or grow. 
His tale dogged them to the city. 
He could be roughing it out there now. 
That could be his shadow 
on any curtain, no matter 
how carefully closed. 
ÔHow sad,' you'll say, 
polite. They'll snort: 
ÔThe little bastard. 
Once let him in 
and you'll never be warm again.
But a good story, no?'
Some sit it out 
in bedsits. Most assimilate 
hungrily. Some of them excel 
in the art of forgetting till not 
even they can tell 
themselves from you or me. 
I knew one who would sparkle and glow 
at all the best addresses. Only, 
when the last guest left, 
the hostess found her carpet printed 
with a cross-pattern tread of mud and snow
and nothing she could do would shift it. 
Cut, Cut
The programme's in the can. That's me, cut clean.
Forget the out-takes tangling in the bin 
like the mating of worms. Forget them, the dumb- 
struck, the stumbles, a night-shelter full, like the hum 
after the Late News, Shipping Forecast, Close Down...
Quick, tune 
me to another channel, easy listening, where a non-
stop DJ is driving his studio through till dawn 
till his lights clip a hitchhiker miles from nowhere
mouthing things at the dark, but he won't pull over, 
would you? Would you wind the window down - 
hey, kid, jump in?
Closed Circuit
Dead space: a lobby like the one 
blank tank in the aquarium
there's always someone staring into. 
Buff peels from the wall 
like hothouse petals, drab exotica 
that pick themselves for any stranger.
There's the camera, bolted out of reach.
Who's to know if that's you 
swimming right now in a goldfish bowl 
in someone somewhere's rank of monitors;
if they're yawning or tapping a roll-up; 
if they're there at all, 
or if you're being reeled straight into canisters 
to be date-coded, sealed and stored, 
wiped in a week or held on suspicion 
in a matrix like the mind of God?
Hard Luck Cafe
It's always open. From inside 
the sign on the door says CLOSED at all hours.
The old girl knows me at a glance. 
She snorts a slow espresso
like a thimbleful of cobwebs 
and nods in that know-something way
I'm beginning to hate just like one of the family.
ÔHow's things?' ÔCan't complain.'
Our words hang, turning slowly in the dust-light
like something a spider was saving for Christmas.
Old chess buffs, 
we play out an endgame of empty cups.
In its cold violet glow
the Insect-O-Cutor spits and spits. 
A daddy-long-legs shrivels on its grille.
Downhometown
Delabole
Houses littered down the roadside
like some lorry's shed load.
Here's where it's at, without the option.
Stacked blue plastic crates
glimpsed through the window 
of the British Legion Hall. 
Last weekend's fete, 
a buff handbill slapped up
like an order to evict. 
On the forecourt of the shut-up shop 
the odd half dozen scuff their heels. 
One stares up the road, then down
and can't decide. One considers the kerb, 
leans his weight on a lamppost 
and kicks the place as if it's jammed; 
if he could just dislodge it everything 
would light up and start humming. 
The girls have memories already; 
they name names from school, 
who's in the army, who's in jail. 
ÔWhat, Gavin? Him?' - ÔThe quiet ones, 
they're the worst.' They stop 
as if I'm nothing, passing, 
but a slight chill in the air. 
They don't look at each other but, 
together, at the place I might have been.
Figure In Landscape: China Clay
A Desert Father might have been at home here:
acres of quartz slag that give to the boot 
with a masculine crunch.
The soft stuff's gone, 
pulled in grey-silky bolts, folded neat 
in square settling-ponds down the valley. 
No end to it: the moorside overflows 
with grit cleanly as caustic soda, 
like the top hat
plundered by a conjuror
with both hands shovelling a froth 
of doves up, half-frightening, white as this 
or the light of the mind. It's a Zen 
monk's garden with one boulder left
in rigorous asymmetry,
the texture of fudge
made with ground glass, and concentric 
ruts of tyre treads raked around it. 
There's a breathing, like surf at the brink 
of things, quite close, rising, falling and yes
here's a fifty-foot gulch
and a sandblast of spray. 
A swivel-cannon with a throbbing hose, 
way down, is stropped to piss the cliff away
while in his sentry box one living soul
sits his shift out. Swills of froth 
make deltas round him. 
He might be a deserter 
from the family this Bank Holiday, a father 
for whom this place has come to seem like home. 
He Went That Way 
A shotgun cartridge 
stomped in the rutted-up mud
it's not. It's a throwaway 
flick-lighter, out of gas.
Zigzag tyre treads 
have snarled up the verge 
as if the whole damn lay-by 
couldn't hold a man like him, 
whoever he was, out of sight 
up the road now, out of mind. 
He'll be talking to thin air 
signing himself on as Fozzie Bear, 
locking in to anyone 
who's passing on his wavelength 
like a non-stop chat show 
or a seance. He's a greyish haze 
where the road impacts on a horizon 
as straight-down-the-line 
as a government health warning. 
If this place remembers him 
it's as dust and a burnt smell 
settling. Wagtails tap-
test the puddles for damage. 
You can see the whole sky 
in a dented hubcap
and the clouds are heavy bruising 
working to the surface
slowly, slowly. 
Quite what's happened, 
it's too soon to say.
from The Wolfboy's Progress
ÔGood... boy...' the Professor says
ÔGood...' (with his back to the locked door)
ÔThat's a good boy' - 
a voice like the tug of a leash
that I might even learn to call Ôkind' 
one day.
The woods have gone slurried with rain on the window. 
In here it's all straight lines and rules.
The Professor keeps a black and white world in a book. 
He spells it out T... R... E... E...
I look away.
He can't fool me. 
On the red leather sofa 
lolls the smug dog. I crouch on the floor, 
the only one she doesn't bounce to. 
She looks down, 
down on me with those dim eyes
they call trusting. Her no-nonsense nose 
is sharp as a sharpened pencil, always 
testing.
Shredded blankets
make a nest.
Crud-flakes clothe
its nakedness.
Chews its hunger 
bitter grub. 
Kips on sore boards. 
There's the rub.
Snarls at pity.
Dumb thing lies.
Gentle gaolers
damn your eyes!
*
The forest won't have me back. I think she's angry. 
She wakes me up shivering with the word Ôhungry' 
on my lips, where before it was simply wanting
as constant as weather. Now I'm drawn to haunting 
outskirts. They're so trusting, leaving curtains 
open to the dark. They leave their gardens 
free for any thing of night to yearn and stare
in at... whatever people do in there. 
A cat
shrugs itself off its bin, 
with bad grace
leaves its pickings to me.
Upstairs a child chafes at a violin.
A door 
swings, shaking light out
like a tablecloth. 
A woman calls. Someone is wanted home. 
No answer. I could run
into that life, 
those thrilling ordinary
cooking smells, into 
someone to be. And here I go 
again, led by the nose.
Trapped, home again, Professor, tail 
between my legs. I'll lap the gruel 
of each day in the classroom, fool 
among fools who grunt and grope for words. 
I'll lick the plate and ask for more. For you 
I'll grow up hard though scarcely 
straight or true. 
And I can sing - 
words pulled on the string of a tune 
like a toy, a wooden duck on wheels 
that clacks and quacks.
Sheet music frightens me, 
those five-wire fences little notes 
get snagged and hang on, 
twitching to get free. 
I'll settle for Country and Western
all lonesome and prayery, with coyotes 
and love, love. Oh gimme 
that sweet cringe and whine.
So one day there's this girl neat
as a clutch of speckled eggs. 
I won't break one, honest. 
Though, oh, I could eat
her up, and her mummy and daddy, 
her regular bedtimes. 
They'd taste sweet, 
dry but more-ish, like nougat.
It's only that granny
who gives me an old-fashioned look:
Young man, don't I know you 
from somewhere? I make them a gift
of my teeth: my most terribly
charming smile.
Memo: get myself a minder
get myself an agent
get myself connections
and a damn good brief
make myself a name
carve a slice of the action
make myself a killing
land on my feet
find myself a sugar mama
doesn't ask questions
when I slink back in the morning
lies and feathers in my teeth
sharpen up my clause
and my wits and my pencil
get ready to pass sentence
I'll suspend their disbelief
If you could see me now, 
Professor - man of letters 
to my name. In short, 
I pass 
the last test, don't I?
They attend, wine glasses 
poised, as I recite
my party piece.
In the ripple this girl
I'd made a note of turns 
her long neck to her beau
and whispers:
Don't you think he's good 
for a... (reckoning without 
my pricked ears) Don't 
you think he's...
Good 
boy. Good boy.
... good.
Static
A rip of tiny lightning in a darkened room. 
Her back's torque tensed to slip
a nylon sweater... How could he
not touch? The same random electricity 
is jizzling on her skin and his. 
Now it arcs, a whip-flick 
like the moment they first spoke, 
that sent him home stung, wondering 
where he'd been hit, 
like a witchfinder with his needle inch-
by-inching for the damned spot 
on himself, inevitably finding it. 
Digital
Prescribe me digitalis 
when the heart beats faster
as with fancying you, or fear, 
or the sight of time 
dealt in a straight flush
on a watch that's not a face
but a rear-view mirror, 
signs and white lines, 
tracer flashes shortening away; 
it's the bullet-proof glass 
behind which the bank girl 
licks her fingers, 
strokes the wad and counts 
me out. There's no tick 
at the bedside these nights 
but green stick figures 
try out all 
the postures one by one. 
They're teaching us to see 
ourselves as liquid crystal 
like the grid of a city by night
seen from a mile up, 
where streets come alive 
at the click of a time-switch, 
contact made, your finger-
tip against my thigh. 
Outside, 
quite close this time, 
a siren dopplers by. 
Bonfire Night
As they're dumped, so they lie. 
She's a soggy-damp mattress, 
all puckers and lumps. He's her guy
with a head full of paper. His sack-
cloth skin itches them both
and his finger twigs scratch 
where she's tender. He's stiff 
in all the wrong places. Whoosh
from next door's garden and a whiff 
of cordite... Always out of sight, 
those oohs and ahs. Strike, strike 
a match. The bloody thing won't light. 
Bodily Fluids
That's autopsy language. 
It means you and me. 
It means holding each other 
carefully, at finger's length, 
like tall flasks that might spill. 
And what price now, that dream
where we meet like an incoming tide 
at the river's mouth, salt 
water tangling with sweet? 
I think Ôsafe', and see sweat-
marked costas, 
a tidewrack of discos and bars 
where last night's love 
is a specimen bagged on the beach; 
and I think of the monk 
who meditated on his body's
entrances and exits - nine, 
each with its own secretion; 
and of breath prints on the window 
where we looked out at the rain; 
and of a world where bodies heat 
to melting but can't touch. 
I think: we've got to think. 
But not too much. 
Night Doubles
On the outskirts of somewhere bypassed in the night
there's a fridge-blue cube of floodlight
with a high wire fence to hold it in. Matched pairs
in white kit flicker in the charmed square
like aquarium fish twitching up to a sifting 
of feed. Now they're still; women
menace the net. One man coils for the serve
that springs them all. They have several
shadows each, that shrink in, then splinter away
as they leap. Outside the game 
tonight, I can't help gazing in. It jiggles us. 
We fall together, or apart, like dice.
from A Day at the Earth-house
ÒUnderneath one particular stone in the south-west quadrant were not only medieval pottery shards but the crushed skeleton of a barber-surgeon, complete with leather purse containing scissors, probe and money.Ó 
The Avebury Monuments: DOE Handbook
Under The Stone
Dry bones. Here's enough for a finger
to crook, to poke. Or two.
Diggers, down on your knees
like a priest's flock to a relic
or a wife who tries to gather every 
fragment of the crock 
her man flung at the wall
as if she might piece their lives together.
Can these bones live? 
Toothbrush them free
as if the lie of them 
held all the clues: whose hand
might drop its pouch of tools 
and throw itself open 
like cards slapped down 
the devil take it, win or lose.
Earthwork
Like a splash
in a green pond baized with duckweed 
that a child could run onto
and drown
ditch and bank
spread; trees, stones, houses 
bob in the jolt of a shockwave
like visible sound
where it sank,
whatever, pitched in. And the ripples
spread till you can't tell them from
encircling downs.
Long Barrow
Late sleepers in the earth-house,
the long bunker on the hill,
this can't be you, this depart-
ment store of bones, thighs racked 
by size, this lego-set of vertebrae, 
toe bone winked in an eye socket. No, 
whatever was you has leached out
with your private juices, out and down 
into stream into soil into grass into cow
into milk and into children's bones again
and of your finest feelings all we know
is that you ached. Arthritis. Ask the bones.
Silbury Hill
The long she of the downs
(Compared to her 
the great flasher of Cerne and all 
that white-horse sky-gymkhana 
are the chalk scrawls of a pavement artist 
before rain...) stirs in her sleep 
or pretends for you, flexing so 
the slope from hip to waist 
or collarbone to nipple tip
is silk pegged in the wind, 
skin alert to be touched, 
half an ache. And the way 
she seems to shift
as you walk deeper, opening a green 
cleave in the snug of it, 
a glimpse of this soft nub, lipped 
in ground that sometimes 
in a season darkens 
to marsh, responding 
to the mood swings of the moon.
Sarsens
Heathen knights, felled 
full length in their armour,
face down on the hillside, still 
they dream us harm.
Will's girl, out late, 
let just the shadow of one
touch her ankle and the child she got
was born cold as a stone.
We say: Bury them.
When a good man loses wife or cow
or strength the stones know why and how.
We say: Bury them, bury them.
Don't breathe a word of them after
but be careful where you dig or plough.
Dating
Purple gobbets on the sarsen.
Birdshit dates us: elderberry season.
At the burial site
ants' wings found in the lowest stratum
nail the death on August. Last 
month's mating flight.
Crack
I know my bones. Which snapped. Pain? No, 
I was a blade of lightning snickersnacked 
lifting her face from the dark of her life 
and all the generations in the earth-house stacked 
like turves, brief flares of wives and daughters 
interlaid with men. As I turned, in the crack 
of the stone door a cat couldn't tease through
I stuck. Wanting out. Wanting back.
Resurrections
And last the archaeologists, the resurrection men,
pose with their big-game bag: a stone
trussed, tractored, block-and-tackled up,
a great slave at an auction, hung with chains.
And in the pit? A sidelong flattened grin. Dry bones.
Facts? Only moderate height. Male.
Slight build. Neck fractured in several places. 
Artefacts?Pouch, leather, with a metal probe, 
scissors, 3 coins (dated circa 1300, 
one of them French), some shards of pot nearby.
Scarcely a Christian burial. 
The Barber Surgeon's Song
Here's one for my probe,
my prick of wit
to get under the skin,
my goad, my God, 
what pouches have I 
kept it in?
Here's two for my scissor-
legs' well oiled hinge
opening time and again
to cut through thou-shalt-knots,
too sharp I hope
to cause much pain.
Here's three for the coins
from here and there
I never did spend.
Two even, one odd.
The reckoning. 
That's it. The end.
Ex
Gusting across, not waiting 
for the lights, just one more
loose end of the working day
leaking home through the cracks
in the traffic, at six 
already dark... Across, between 
a humped Wimpey-jacketed back 
hugging two carrier bags 
from the off-licence
and a shock-mascara'd 
teenage mum gone grey 
in my headlights 
(her buggy-bound astronaut 
bumping down 
to a breath of exhaust on his cheek)...
Across, not looking left or right
between the neon CHRIST
IS THE ANSWER on the shut 
shop of the chapel 
and the Asian minimarket
(the whole family gathered in
round the freezer, disputing, 
their faces lit upwards 
in Christmas-card glow)...
Stooping across, between 
my bumper and the brake lights
of a transit van, not an arm's reach away
and turning for a moment, 
square on and not seeing, 
it was you - 
pale, puffed, distracted 
as if flickered up 
by my dipped beam out of focus. 
I was glad to see you cast a shadow. 
Time Out
There's a curt breeze up. 
A grainy whiteness 
far out. One gull looking for its shadow
on a mile of sand. And you, 
how strange, it's you. 
White wrought iron chairs
are leaning, elbows on their tables. 
All the parasols are down 
but one. It hackles and slaps
above you. You're taking your ease 
deep out of any season, 
in that bleached-out frock, 
arms bare, 
leaning back like a lady of leisure. 
You ought to be chilled to the bone. 
To a life 
spent doling cups of kindness! 
Now you drink, disgracefully, alone 
taking clear water straight on the rocks. 
The glass sweats with the cold. 
The wind is impatient. 
It wants to sweep under your feet. 
You won't be hurried now. 
A newspaper peels itself page 
by page, and every one is white. 
What news? There's silence in it. 
Guest Of The Atlantic
Blame the state I'm in this morning on the waitress, 
her and her surfer, all night in the other attic room. 
I'd passed them on the stairs. Her landed merman, 
he looked like someone come to do the plumbing, or his mate, 
with a six-pack toolkit. Then it was the steady scrape 
of his voice through the wall, hers demurring, just enough 
to keep us all up. When at last my toothmug started 
rattling on the basin, all the crying-out-loud 
was his. Then, quite soon, running water in the pipes 
that connected us. Then his snores. Was she there at all?
Somewhere down the line I dozed and I was dreaming 
I was Cornwall, varicose with rivers, cramped 
in an armlock of sea. I was a crumpled map 
full of words that were me too, but what 
did they mean: Praze-an-Beeble, Zelah, Perranzabuloe?
Then there was dawn picking holes in the curtains. 
I woke numb all down one side. I tried not to move 
as if I could put off what came next, the pain 
that would sew my two halves back together, 
pins-and-needles like the screel of rooftop gulls. 
The surf was mixing concrete all night. 
There's the beach, new-laid, 
spoiled with footprints already. 
The wind flaunts straight into the waves 
which start to smoulder - overheating brakes 
or a tyre in a skid. Hot fat 
nearing flashpoint. The surfers are up. 
Reduced to their own silhouettes
in wetsuits they range out along a swell, 
cave-painted hunters, watchful less 
of the prey, which is vicious but slow, 
than each other. Who will strike the killing blow?
In black-and-white, trim-pinnied, she's serving again. 
There's a coffee-dregs look in her eyes. 
She drops two rounds of post 
beside my breakfast in a silver toast rack:
c/o The Atlantic Hotel. Please Forward. 
Hungry for a Missing You or two 
I slit them then, to prove I'm a free man, 
let them lie, and read the window:
waves rule thick smudge lines; 
the surfers' heads are punctuation 
with no words. They break all at once, 
all but one. He's waiting, days, 
nights, for the biggie, the one 
with his name lettered through it
like rock, the one that - since Chaos 
Theory's all we've got to go on - 
could be stirring in the womb 
of the Atlantic now, conceived 
by the cough of an outboard motor 
somewhere in the Gulf of Mexico. 
Mermaid, Zennor Church
She's not coy,
slipping out of her scales. 
She peels them down like tights 
just so far. 
Where the first tweak of hair 
might be, they ruck and cling. 
She shows herself 
simply, like the highest mathematics, 
an elegant paradox, QED 
in wood that's charred
as if fresh from the stake. Still, 
the just-risen swell of her belly 
comes out whole. 
It's smooth, worn smooth: I'm not 
the only one who's had to touch 
and touch again, 
a bit shy to be caught kneeling 
by the granite altar. Squeamish, too:
what if my fingers brushed 
against the scar-grain of the face 
that's gone? Those four straight slashes 
scored through breasts 
and forehead, cheek and chin? Yes, 
touch there. gently. Pray for something 
to begin to heal, in me. 
A Dangerous Age 
He lifts up her face and she lets him, 
she lets him smooth it 
like a finely rumpled sheet, 
stroking out from the eyes, 
their dusty corners, down the cheek, 
easing ten years away
for a moment. Forking lifelines wait 
in the grain of the skin 
as if scribed by a 5H pencil. 
Rub gently, rub hard; held to the light 
the traces show. 
It's a dangerous age. 
No wonder our grandmothers taught us 
to put it away 
like their guests-only china 
so fine it held shadows. Not old 
but not young, these two 
tread the cusp, a narrow bridge 
without a handrail, breathing quick 
from the risk like thinned air, 
touching at a time like this 
just to steady themselves, 
for safety, 
though they know there's no such thing. 
Mispickel
Mispickel: arsenic ore, reprocessed from the waste of worked-out tin mines
Here's the man,stepping back into daylight. 
There's the furnace with its burnt-stone breath. 
The hand he holds out is a mitt that grips 
and nothing else; he's swaddled up to the slot 
where his eyes shift and blink. Now he breathes 
almost free. Come payday, that's a bob or two 
he'll not say no to. I should leave him 
to the facts, statistics settling steady as the smoke 
downwind: he won't make thirty. Leave him 
to bare hands, a woman's; quick, her fingertips 
unpick him. Unable to do for himself
he waits; she winds the graveclothes off him. 
Strip by strip, skin reappears. He stands 
as naked as a thing she's made 
and will make, again and again. 
His chest is white as cuttlebone, 
with scant black hairs and small sores 
that don't heal. Half-baked from the ovens, 
he has only her to finish him, 
quick, while he's back from the dead, on leave. 
She rinses, twining fingers in the bowl, 
flicking the drops off, while he watches 
as if nothing but her touch could make him speak. 
Rites and Passages.
1.
Dead water. Swamp mist swabs away 
both shores, so there's no to or from,
no sign the ferry's moving with its freight 
of families, displaced, clutching small 
belongings. Only the deaf-mute has none.
He grins at the wake his finger traces 
in the water. Our reflections come undone. 
2.
Click, clack, yes-sir, our garden windmill-
mannikin snaps to attention (dabs of black
and red suggest a uniform) then abases himself 
in a right-angled bow: up, down. The windvane 
edges, angles, sensing power, undefined 
and shifting, like true north... while him, 
click, clack, he thinks he drives the wind.
3.
Spuds of flint in the furrows 
scratched across the grain of downland. 
Not a tree for miles. This post 
marks nothing but a mid-point: 
owl-cacked, lichened, like a lost
god, where a hedge was grubbed up, 
where our paths once crossed.
4. 
In Stone Street, in a room without a door, 
without paint or plaster, in two 
narrow beds (which are one bed sawed 
in half and propped a little more 
than an arm's reach apart) a sleepless 
man, a woman. It's as they once swore: 
they said Nothing will come between us.
5.
Aaah! The barbarians hiss. A brand 
sputters, punched into darkness 
and the flames swarm hand over hand 
up walls of ivy tangle. All our faces 
burn. Tear it down, down, down, we bay. 
The folly crumbling, its cry escapes 
our throats. We chase ourselves away.
6.
Long dunes. A salt marsh. A grey man 
hauling driftwood feels the tremor 
and stiffens upright. Spattering sand 
and hooves they're on him, bareback, 
stretched, gone in a shudder of speed.
He watches them diminish, then 
he stoops again. He has a fire to feed.
7.
It's their day, the children. See them glow
and crackle. They claw the bright wrappings
away to find masks: one Papuan, an oh!
of real teeth set in clay; one Aztec, 
spiked with feather shafts; one Maori, mazy 
spirals; one bronze, from Mycenae, 
blind; some of no age...
8.
Waves on the shingle, white on grey
and a grey-wash sky. Among the stones 
we find this clasp, a twist of male 
and female, naked long-backed bodies 
twined in blackened silver. But of who 
wrought the knot, who lost it, what 
it held in place... no clue.
Out There
Now this comes back, from nowhere, 
like an unsigned postcard: snow 
on a hill that cold-shouldered the town, 
and tracks, our tracks, not close 
or quite parallel, edging together 
at last in a wood, 
a clearing like a room 
with the blinds drawn and furniture draped. 
There were ashes trodden into mud 
like cooled volcano slurry, 
someone's fire. A strand of smoke 
spooled up like milk in water. 
When I flushed a flame 
from cover in the cinders 
it was pale 
as something born too soon. 
It had been keeping for the night. 
She stayed deep in the folds of her coat. 
I turned to say ÔWe should be going...'
but, just for a moment, 
could not think which way was home. 
1. 
THE ICE FACTORY 
(1980-84)
New Words For Home
for Alma Gross 1891-1969, and J.K.Gross 1919-
Grey waters, no horizons. Shifting screens 
before and after: fog. Belowdecks, machinery 
goes on, a guttural ache, and the between-
time lasts, lasts,
 suddenly delivers me 
to wharves, warehouses shading out of grey 
like rumours in a foreign language, headlines 
on a broadsheet washed out in the rain. 
§
'Name?' At a trestle desk 
I'm dealt a form. Such spaces 
to be filled. A pen, 
lifted, waits. 'Name?' 
Heavy on my tongue here, 
it's a precious coin, our broken 
currency.
 'That's all. 
Next?' In the yard
I clutch my patiently-
spelled papers. Here
is who I am.
§
Unquiet at my window, dawn. An exodus 
of clouds on sheer grey plains. 
This country's thin snow, sparse, 
ashen, ticks at the pane.
I try to imagine you, waking: streets 
of numb drifts, silence, snow-light 
without shadows, the chocked ruts 
of grey trucks smothered in the night 
which you won't mention, seeing clear 
enough: the future comes like this. 
A year on, your first letter, and I peer
beneath the words for clues. 'We miss 
you. Life goes on.' What clerk in uniform
before me sifted through the gentle dross
for guilt? The words pass... and confirm 
my fears, the distances, the loss. 
§
Strangers, for your family album... She
conspires a smile; this bright
complete new world is her creation. He 
is still her 'foreign gentleman', guest 
to this warm sufficiency,
his stiff tact faltering to tenderness
unnerved by their three-day child.
Here, now, nothing less, 
it demands him, such uncompromised 
need. The new life. Five years on they're no
less strangers. Mother,
would you know your own son now?
§
Your grandchild, grown tall
in a temperate land: how easily 
he speaks of rights 
and wrongs. Such innocence: 
a knock on the door at midnight?
Friends, late, from a party. How I envy him, 
and fear for him, who can't imagine why 
I jerk awake and scold, from fright.
§
No more, now.
One letter missed, one more not answered, 
and before I knew
you had begun 
your silence, taking all that was gone
to yourself. So, then, this was the new 
world where I'd be... - what were the words?
“at home”... “in no time”. Only now.
Stations
Each country was a station, more or less the same 
- clamour in darkness, brilliant shrieks of steam 
ballooning into gloomy arches. Everyone was strange, 
the fat man huffed and comical, bleating as if in a dream
'My bags. Where am I?' Sometimes uniforms would change.
Prague... Vienna... Paris... Europe was a game 
they should be winning, surely? Town by town, hotels 
grew smaller, hosts smiled less, fewer bells rang.
The plumbing was louder, windows smaller to the sky,
back alleys closer, with sunk yards like dried-up wells 
where servants clattered, quarrelled and, mysteriously, sang. 
His parents grew difficult, not explaining why
when letters came, she cried, and later cried again 
when the letters stopped. He stood at a kiosk jostling 
among dissonant voices, jowled sour-smelling men, 
for a paper Father glanced at, then threw down (rain 
speckling the page, the dark stain slowly blossoming, 
blotting faces, ranks of print...) More often then 
there were voices raised outside his room, or had he dreamed 
that? Father and Mother. Le patron and father. Please,
please... And there was Mother, bending close, her hand 
steadying him, or herself: 'Listen. You must understand.
Now we have nothing...' And at once, it seemed, 
another station: they were struggling trunks (could these 
be 'nothing'?) into battlemented piles. Now to play.
'Look at me. I'm king...' He faltered as he saw 
hundred encamped around him, like the tribes of Israel. 
Nobody turned. Then a shadow and a roar 
of power reined in, steel shrilling on the rail.
The crowd broke round and over him, swept him away.
Snail Paces
As I pry beneath crumbling bricks they come
to light, pale embryos unfolding. Slim 
wands question space,
touch-tentative. They lift small frills 
to glide and teeter, balancing their shells
like the family china. Or brace
on the hawser of themselves; the load stirs 
and follows like a shadow. Each shoulders 
his small world like a sack
and strains towards his half-an-inch horizon.
We are less to them than clouds across the sun.
Beneath the thrush's block 
we find them threshed out, littering the grass,
mute violated husks. Bend closer. Pass
down empty corridors,
intimate windings, moulded by the sheer
day-in-day-out of flesh. Mother of pearled,
the inner chamber of the ear.
Crab
Shifty, side-skittling, he's on the run,
the Scissor Man,
with his antique weapons, his stage-wrestler's pose.
And cornered... Cocked, grappling his load
of menace. Eyes 
at the battle slit, glistening. And afraid, 
yes, rigid, in his frightful uniform, my tuppenny
ha'penny samurai... 
He squats. Shimmies the quicksand. Melts away.
In Another Part Of The Wood...
(Aldermaston)
a world ends, where a swathe of moonlight
silvers a ten foot wire. The shadow-
cratered heath beyond is bright 
as frost. A few slim birches tiptoe 
in among cowled pipes, squat tumuli 
with concrete cladding, grilles that hum.
It's here, the future's archaeology.
Not a living soul stirs
but kids who come
for the fabulous blackberries, powder blue
eggs in deserted nests, huge lunar mushrooms
or on the spongy moss tumps, two by two,
conduct their own experiments.
Hush
hush: two wobbly spooks of steam 
twine upwards from their buried vents 
and fade apart, like lovers in a dream.
Night-Offering
It was an afterwards, a cindered waste.
Dim skylines crumbling into dusk.
Torn webs of girders. Soft 
as snow, in the dead calm, drifts 
of ash, a flat sour aftertaste.
Do you hear me? Half in your own dream 
you stir beside me. Listen. There 
were the survivors, shrink round a thin flame,
hands cradling the glow. What more 
to say? I crept near. One of them, 
you, turned towards me, lifting from the fire 
this fragment that comes with me as I wake:
a twig of blackthorn, bare, 
barbed, angular. The palest foam 
of blossom breaks along its ragged wire.
The October People
At last, hunger and weariness wore out our fear.
We crept from the forest, found a track and so 
came to the village called October. Blown seeds of war, 
we were wretched, ragged. Still, they turned to hear 
as if expecting us. Their dialect moved close and slow 
around us. Yes, there were soldiers, weeks before, 
see there, the flag they left... It guttered brown 
in the wet wind. Took what they could, promised a new 
world, said the farm wife, bringing to the shed 
thin broth in an iron bowl. We huddled down 
in rough hay sweetness. 'In the morning, you 
must go.' 'And you?' 'We bake black bread, 
stack wood, salt beef, bury our savings deep...'
The oil wick sputtered. 'After, we repair 
the damage? Bitter? As well blame 
the leaves for falling.' Falling into sleep 
I dreamed of leaves, of smoky pyres that flare 
against the dark, brighter as the wind beats on the flame.
Facing The Sea
Low tide and winter. Windows full of Vacancies 
outface the empty shingle. Miles of esplanade 
whose windy shelters bear scars, elegies 
to last year's lusts, lost causes, relegated teams.
The hard boys slouch outside the boarded-up arcade 
like ghosts of Bank Holidays past, uneasy dreams.
Nothing awaits them, except time. The air 
they breathe is bitter, their radios a thin 
irritable whine. They neither speak nor stir 
as two intruders inch across the afternoon,
old man and boy. Their stare prickling his skin, 
the boy stiffens. Oh, to be someone else, and soon.
To outgrow this half life. To be free 
of kindnesses, comforts, tacky threads that bind 
him to an out of season childhood. 'History...?'
the old man rambles. His eyes crease but never blink,
as if scanning the sea, as if he were not blind.
'Too grand a gent to visit here. Or so we think. 
At your age I'd crossed three frontiers, left behind 
all but what wouldn't leave me - a long memory 
and a Litvak name. Two burdens, no? You're kind, 
despite yourself. You want, and fear, to be alone.
But it goes so quickly, though you won't agree...'
The waves' dull rant goes on, stones grind on stone, 
march, countermarch. Beyond the noise 
a small far voice still asks: Papa, they hate 
us. Why? Lost in the roaring. But the boy's 
grip tightens, pulls. 'Easy. They smell your fear.
Don't look behind. Look at the sea.' The others wait,
hands idle, toying with a laugh, a stone, a jeer.
Vapourer
A drop of sugar-water, a jam jar on a string 
and hush... His flashlight pried among the trees, 
jiggled and feinted, then was still. The evening 
thickened with scents and chilled, ruffling our hair
as we shrank to one shadow, watched the jam jar swing 
spotlit, a moon-faced grin... Conjured from air 
they rose: ghost-waltzers, wisps, dissolving in 
and out of light, to flirt, a shimmer, there 
and gone. Then one was down, grounded and jittering, 
ours. Dazzled by sweetness, the frail feathery 
scanners fenced. The tinny flitter of a wing 
gold-dusted the glass. We muffled its small frenzy, 
ran all the way home. In daylight it weighted nothing, 
was a husk, a burnt-out fuselage. He staked it tidily
with pins; I thumbed my Smaller British Moths, mouthing 
a kind of litany: Buff Tip, Pale Tussock, Vapourer... 
'Again, tonight?' No, no. I couldn't name it, something 
gone between us, our breath frosting the night air.
Allies
A sweet smother of gorse,
pods crackling like flame.
Grasshoppers ratcheting. The thrum 
of honey bees recalled the roars 
(but distantly) of Flying Fortresses 
that cracked the concrete runways 
like thin ice. We found no trace 
of the airmen, lords of Lucky Strike, 
mobbed by the likes of us for gum,
except a washed-out YANKS GO HOME.
They went, with razor blades and Coke 
and half the village girls 
in tow. The parish in a pique 
bulldozed all that was destructible. 
Still, their pillboxes squat
in the brambles, low-browed grins 
KEEP OUTed and bricked in, 
steel hatches rusted shut
(though from beneath the sill 
that greenish seep of mud 
smelt faintly bestial).
But in a swampy bomb-hole one 
slewed backwards, angled 
to the sky, door buckled 
agape. We hunkered down, 
crept crabwise in. And clutched 
at the air. Our bearings gone, 
we saw each other pitched 
at a drunk slant to the floor
and walls, their cocksure verticals 
quite unperturbed... We scrabbled 
out, blinking. Then roared 
our bicycles away towards the faint 
heat-shimmer where the runway's parallels
dissolved, the vanishing point.
The Displaced Persons Camp
Lean vigilant faces, sleepless eyes
look up. They sit like children grown 
unnaturally, cramped into desks in rows,
and submit to the language of strangers, a stern 
new ordering of tenses: is, was,
will be. 'Repeat now, after me.' Each voice 
lifts towards clarity, and breaks: waves 
on a north shore, a dull bafflement of loss.
'The subtler points - should, might have been - 
will come in time.' The class dismissed, 
they are free to sit, or pace the bare
perimeter. Willowherb flares from the dust. 
It is neither peace nor war. Beyond the wire 
in wide fields, two boys and a dog 
race after their own cries. And stop. And stare. 
The Victory Dance
The Village Hall in glad rags. The St Juliot 
Swing Combo: 'Take your partners, please...'
Three girls to each man. 'And let's not forget 
our foreign guests...'
The refugees,
shipped from the Camp, clumped round the stove 
or drank themselves to tears. But he...
That slight stiff bow. He clicked his heels.
'Permit me the pleasure.' (Imagine, mother. Me.)
He danced like an officer. Yet when the band
came fumbling to a halt, I dared a glance 
and caught him lost for words, yes, shy.
Not like that tea time. The great aunts 
closed ranks on the settee, the Three Monkeys:
Pru's puddle glasses; Dot's hand cupped 
to her bad ear; Vi's nice inquisition, carefully 
enunciated as if to a child. The tea unsupped.
He was... correct: 'Madam, I comprehend. 
But cannot, as you say, go home.'
Then Jack was demobbed, full of beer 
and battles, thumping: 'I don't give a damn
what kind of foreigner....' 
I was afraid. 
By night, voices pitched from the Quarrymen's 
Arms, hard laughter. 
How could we have stayed?
And yet... A white walled hut. The Chaplain's 
gruff brusque blessing. A Best Man 
who spoke no English. I thought of you,
and a church awash with hymns and flowers. 
('You must learn,' he said, 'you too,
about leavings behind.') That night, 
the only guests in the hotel, we ate 
in silence, cutlery chinking on our plates, 
the landlady vigilant. Then we flung out
past curtained terraces onto the Prom,
past street lamps smoking with blown spray.
I huddled close, thinking, 'Soon it must 
be easier. We'll know what to say.'
I lie awake. Rain chafes the window. 
Mother, he sleeps huddled, deep, 
but has such dreams. What can I do?
He speaks a foreign language in his sleep.
A Honeymoon
The sea was tame but he was clumsy, half afraid. 
'Like this,' I laughed and dived, slipped through 
to a world without walls, my secret smoky-blue
basement. The mirrored ceiling swaying overhead
shattered, but silently. Pale waterbaby, eyes 
and hair wild, topsy-turvy, groping in a dumb-
show of dismay, he fell to me. The dream 
broke as his hand gripped mine; we rose 
into sun glare, beach cries. He was gentle then 
a while, our prints fading off concrete, leading in 
to the bare cool hotel room.
Some evenings still 
as I wait for his key in the lock I think of thin 
blue curtains rippling shut, the sudden chill, 
the taste of salt, blue shadows mottling our skin.
A Plague Of Jellyfish
One morning the sea blossomed with them, pale fleurs du mal
the Gulf Stream shunted into our too-perfect bay.
They curdled in the waves
and blotched the sand. We mourned the spoiled day
by bickering, then sulked, gazed from the harbour wall...
Slow-flouncing, rippling, with movements hardly more
than a tremor of light they massed, small fantasies
in see-through lace
tricked out with poison hair, the sea's
vague figments, flotsam hushed towards the shore,
threats, promises... You reached out, drew us tight 
together as that sightless unrelenting stare
surrounded us, mauve-veined
irises flexing as if brought to bear 
on unfamiliar distances, our shifts of dark and light.
The Gift
Clogged under cinders, nettles, waste,
it could have been a meteorite 
or an old potato. But the mud crust cracked 
and flaked away, and look,
it's a perfect ovoid, pearl-
iridescent, seamless, 
an immaculate earth-shell. 
I raise it to you like cut glass.
And there's an ocean in it. Feel the stir
and fall, the tides taut, quivering, 
alive. The air 
around us has a salt spray-sting
while deep, safe as a sunken galleon
a dim speck quickens, 
hunches, shuffling its cells
like an old man playing patience.
A scroll we cannot read yet, it unfurls 
itself, a dark map-labyrinth 
filling with dawn. Spark trails 
open to thoroughfares, transparent
cities like sleeping hives grow gold-
opaque and audible. Dogs bark, 
the traffic starts up like an iron waterfall
and people rise, as we do. Take
this, love, this curious weight 
on us. It wants to live. 
It seeks us out, says Give 
me. And we give, we give. 
First Encounter 
Abstract and intimate, circling in a void, 
you closed on us. The bubble of our world 
warped, quivered. You were not to be denied. 
A flicker of static, of Morse: yes, yes. 
A blip on a dark screen, homing. I can't tell 
who called, who answered: you or us.
Or gravity, a dumb inevitable fall, 
your lit speck skating over emptiness, 
irrupting here, in a dazzling antiseptic cell
with dark before and after. 'It's a girl,'
this lean survivor, streaked with blood and foam.
Now we must wash you into human form, 
that venerable head, webbed vellum, purple-
muddied map of a fabulous country, pulsing. 
Post Natal
Adrift, and dazed with sleeplessness.
That cry,
needle-thin, frail, pitiless,
reels me in. Fed, he
sleeps; I
push back the curtains on a world of time
grown strange to me.
A milky slick of smoke hangs low 
above empty gardens; only sky 
moves, glacially slow.
He stirs.
In our warm lit room,
our honeyed cell, I am calm and numb
as if consoled in mourning, but for whom?
Friends come
tender and hesitant, eyes bright, bearing flowers.
First Day Out.
Through the hospital gate
the world. The three of us, we're strangers here.
It's all too sudden, an astonishment 
of detail, every leaf too clear,
the raddling of old brick
too intricately tooled in smog and sulphur. Tears of rust 
commemorate old railings plucked for war.
The pansies' puggy faces thrust 
up at the sun. Wires 
sew the street together, tingling with news. Two doors 
ajar, Mrs 63 and old man 65 conspire 
as we pass. They barely pause.
We're not that special 
with our new life tender as a wound. She lies unblinking, 
an Eskimo doll, dropped here without a word 
of the language. Sparrows chinking 
like empty bottles, a bus 
that grits its gears, a snatch of glottal-sloppy chat, a shout 
of airbrakes, sunlight, you and I are all 
becoming her: another lifer, out 
on parole. Becoming one of us.
A Report Of The Burglary
Nothing of value was taken. 
But the spirits of the place, the bird-voiced ones, 
took fright. They slipped out through the smashed 
back window where the night came in. 
He came home to find drawers torn out, 
clothes scattered. There was nowhere 
where the strangers had not been, nothing untouched 
or likely to feel clean again. And the silence...
Gone, the gentle presences, who welcomed him 
each evening, with an imperceptible 
dove-murmuring, who soothed him with a dance 
like dust on air, who made the fragments one.
The silence. Every door concealed an emptiness. 
He saw peeled paper, splinters, spider-cracks,
some lodging rooms, some bric-a-brac.
The strangeness entered him. 
There were investigations. A report was made:
Nothing of value was taken. Now, 
when the last of the strangers had gone, he knew 
nothing of value remained.
Beside The Reservoir
A surface still as marble. Drystone masonry 
runs straight in, under. There is no other shore 
but a thin brilliance of mist. One tree 
stoops, wait deep. At the small thud of a door 
the gulls flush upwards briefly. By the car 
two figures stand as if breath-taken. Once 
they would have talked, talked, troubling to share 
the luminous distance. Now, he points 
to bird flecks drifting far out: a precarious 
species, winter visitors. She takes his arm, 
keeps company, through certain silences 
accepted like the need for water, for the drowned farm.
The Curator's Tale
Where do they come from, or go, these few 
a rainy afternoon blows in to share 
the stillness of stuffed animals? (The kingfisher's 
crackling spark, earthed here, is simply blue;
the salmon gapes, embedded stupidly in air.)
Case after case reflects them loitering among 
wombat, echidna, axolotl, pygmy shrew;
the Galapagos tortoise, turned to stone 
after a lifetime practising; the buttock-faced dugong 
that sailors rank with grog and solitude 
took for a mermaid. 'That's the stuff' 
(my little joke) 'that dreams are made on.'
No one smirks. Ah well. These shrugged-off 
species are my stock in trade. Yet if 
he (facing the Irish Elk) would turn 
and speak, and she (by the dusty clutter 
of Fox Cubs At Play) would startle, and respond, 
I'd throw the cases open, goldfinches 
flirt up in a charm, the grizzled otter 
splash clean through the perspex of its pond.
Man and Wife 
Jesse and Susannah Raddall
Great-grandfather, stiff as a parson you 
command my presence. Stern proprieties 
buttress you, you them. A family, a farm, 
a church, a constitution, all 
the hard won hills around you stand 
because you do, upright. You must wonder who 
this stranger is: what kind of man 
never sat at a long oak table, saying grace 
over hushed heads, carving knife in hand 
with the beef blood on it;
what kind of man never learned through the skin 
the leather testament, the print of things 
beyond question: belt strap, Ten Commandments;
what kind of man, embarrassed to set his 
the last name in your family Bible. 
Sons after sons, grown small 
before you, felt your great hand raised 
like the rainclouds over Cornwall, 
tablets of the Law. Old man, 
the shadows that you cast 
close round you now. Your hands 
hang empty. Memories of the soil 
you loved and mastered leak 
through your fingers. Reach 
to me, stranger.
And I touch 
an old photograph. Your black on white 
steps back into hundred year twilight. 
Speak. 'Alone... I worked my own 
salvation, with these hands.' And she?
That pale girl at your side?
'Alone.'
Brought to a hard house young, 
to a strong cold man who prayed 
like thunder, hammering dull 
souls to pliant leather. Chill 
stony water and a smouldering grate, 
the scrubbed slate threshold, the family name, 
a bed in a crooked room. The man 
stamped his features from you: nine 
children. With the last you died 
: a shadow into shadows,
a new voice in the choir of silences.
Your name, that was his
and your father's, spoken in the empty house,
sinks without ripple. 
What inheritance is yours? Outside, 
the vixen's cry 
shivers and stills, once only, far away.
The Musical Cottage
An endless Sunday. In the attic room
the solitary child sits. The tune 
deliberates each note, each stepping stone 
across depths of silence. From the trim 
toy chalet two unchanging faces stare, 
a mother and father in separate windows, 
weather people. He sees more than he knows 
as he hinges the roof back on the whirr 
and tick of cogs, precise machineries 
circling on themselves, clinched and 
slowing. As 'Edelweiss' grows hesitant 
he shuts his eyes, wonders 'Where is 
the music?' Elsewhere. He can catch 
only the after-trace, the bright splash 
dissolving into ripples where the fish 
has gone: beyond him, or too close to touch. 
The final note hangs frozen at the lip
of silence. 
Thirty years.
It will not drop. 
Nursery Rhymes
Mother, you didn't tell me
that the Witch lived on the bomb site down the road, where the House That Jack Built foundered, rubble-dust and weed; her familiars were the prehistoric earthmovers with their insect jaws, and cranes like skeletons of knights in armour swinging slow murderous iron balls...
that the Three Bears grumbled and roared at each other in the house next door; their Goldilocks, frail changeling daughter, played in the yard, a hundred miles away; she never spoke to me...
that the Man In The Moon was my Uncle Tom; he stared at his reflection in an endless sea like the face of a drowned twin; 'Out, get out!' he raged at Wynken, Blynken, Nod and me; we disturbed his immaculate loneliness...
that Grandmother ate the Wolf; No Hawkers No Pedlars said the gate and she meant it, with an axe-glint in her eye; one night, small howls and struggles, then a hush behind her bedroom door; next morning, 'Grandma's gone away'; the Wolf was free...
No, Mother, you didn't tell me the half of it.
Maybe you had forgotten. But I knew.
I always knew.
A Ringside Seat
After the tightrope walker's steely equipoise, 
strongmen, cowed famous beasts, a last fanfare, 
they jumbled in. Dwarfed by their own noise 
they stomped and squabbled through the smoky glare,
loud as a playground. The midget's inconsolable boohoo.
The boss clown's cackle and bark. I shrank 
back, touched cool canvas and slipped through 
into darkness... 
And that bright world sank 
behind, a big ship passing. Suddenly adrift 
I stumbled in mud. Nearby, a guttural hum. 
A dog dragged at its chain. A baby coughed 
and keened. Dark trailers. Washing on a string. 
Stale diesel sweat. And I crouched shivering 
by a huge wheel hub; tried to remember home.
The Stadium
A phosphorus white glare 
behind the housetops. Out of yards 
and ginnels, shadows flowed 
together, past my window. Flare 
of a match in cupped hands, 
embers bobbing. Dark designs. 
SPEEDWAY TONIGHT: I heard 
the tetchy whoops and whines 
of starved machines I never saw.
Next day the track was scribbled, 
rucked; the grass here dulled 
with dust, there parched to straw; 
the corrugated shed (GRANDSTAND
1s 6d) patched with a sign 
for Whiffs, a platform on a soon-
to-be-disused branch line.
Chip papers, fag ends, emptiness 
with a sweet scorched smell. 
And silence? No, a subtle 
niggling in my ear, a tinnitus:
grasshoppers, coming out like stars
till the whole field thrilled
with brittle simmering applause
- abruptly stilled.
'Oy!' Cinders crunched: 
an oily giant with a jerrycan. 
'Lost summat, boy?'
he grinned. I up and ran. 
Powder Mills
Dartmoor, 1873
Built for explosions -
a roof light as a crust of lichen,
walls like bastions.
Made to shed
their hobnails at the door, the men 
entered 'shod 
like parsons'. Brimstone
in the air, and the fine black dust 
a narrow sun-
slant might reveal 
ascending round their heads, a bright host.
Rumbling of the wheels.
Yet Silas who would down 
his day's victuals at one sitting 'lest
I perish before noon'
never missed a day 
'for it minds me of God's mercy. And besides 
the work is dry.'
A thump in the air,
less heard than felt. They pause. Outside
the pot-bellied mortar
fumes. An overseer
gauges the proving-shot's trajectory. Two score
yards: the powder 
is approved. A rabbit's
white scut jiggles through the gorse, and fear
keeps within limits,
knows its place. 
It is another century. Larks shrill and rise,
rise to the emptiness of space.
The Ice Factory
'Not a great deal is known about this minor industry, which appears to have had a short life.' Helen Harris, Industrial Archaeology of Dartmoor.
A hush like a shut Bible. Father: 'Grace
will wait...' The latch clacks. Our stare 
lifts from our cold meat, from the empty place 
to the door... and Cousin Joseph. His chair 
grates on the flags, and Father: 'Now
let us pray...'
Who knew him? Slow 
to speak or laugh, slow at the plough, 
some kind of fool, they said. I'd go 
to fetch him in from the topmost field:
'This place don't give us nothing free
but rain. So Father says.'
He smiled.
November, bitter drizzle. He 
went up the hillside as the cloud came down. 
December, snow penned us behind doors. 
The first clear morning, we'd see thin 
tracks, wavering slightly, up into the moor. 
In March, I followed. Jumbled stone 
in a windy hollow; black peat-water riffling;
a turf-wadded hut. 'You've come alone?'
He prised the door, “Then look.” Nothing, 
I saw nothing, or a glistening black, before 
the ice-cold took my breath. His chill 
smile: 'Things aren't always where 
they're needed. Are we, girl?'
April,
he was gone. Was seen halfway to town, 
cart lumbering under bales of moss and straw, 
steaming and dripping. 'Taking water down,'
they laughed. 'Thought that's what river's for.'
Then nothing. Though the horse was found 
by the docks where the tall ships come. All year 
they traded stories - 'mad', 'enlisted', 'drowned'
- and tell them still for any stranger's beer 
since the farm's gone back to moor.
And now
this flimsy envelope: New York. Inside, 
'My father would have wished...'
He was rich, somehow.
Had grandsons. Mentioned me before he died.
5.
THE END OF THE PIER SHOW
Catch
Here is a woman. Here is a man. 
And here is how the game began. 
We call it Catch Me If You Can.
He was the one and only. 
She wrapped him all around. 
He kicked against his swaddlings. 
She knew where he was bound 
His first cry was 'Ergo Sum.' She knew the proof was sound. 
I play Robber. You play Cop.
We play Catch You On The Hop. 
He toyed with a naked razor. 
She taught him how to shave.
He said: I'm off to do or die. 
She waited like the grave. 
He left her on the harbour wall and she became a wave. 
I play Therefore. You play If. 
We play Try To Catch My Drift.
He was the lost explorer. 
She was his New Found Land. 
He was the pilgrim father. 
She was the shifting sand. 
She was the straw he clutched at when he'd nowhere left to stand.
I play Sorry. You play Scold. 
We play Couldn't Catch A Cold.
He mused in a country churchyard. 
She was the tongue of the bell.
He prayed to become a hermit.
She was his spidery cell. 
When Heaven left him cold in bed, she was the fires of Hell. 
I play Day. You play Night. 
We play Catch My Bones Alight. 
He ran away to battle. 
She met him dressed in red. 
He won a famous victory. 
She was the wound that bled 
and out of it marched the living and into it marched the dead
and there was nothing he could do and no more to be said.
Here is a woman, here is a man 
and they are nowhere. 
Peace at last...?
But
Is that you?
Yes. Is that you?
Can we begin again?
We can.
from A Game of Henge
for John Eaves
1.
A game of Henge, my masters?
The pieces are set. We lost the box 
with the instructions years ago.
Do you see Hangman? Or 
Clock Patience? Building bricks 
the gods grew out of? Dominoes?
It's your move. You're in the ring 
of the hills, of the stones, of the walls 
of your skull. You want to go?
You want out? Good - that's 
the game. Whichever way you turn 
are doors. Choose. Step through, so... 
And whichever world you stumble into 
will be different from all the others, only 
what they might have been, 
you'll never know.
2.
Those stony backs. A scrum around a whisper:
Hush. Hiss. Who?
Why won't they let you in? No, it's a 
secret secret
won't tell YOU...
A playground wide as Wessex. Wire barbs 
the wind whines through.
You'd wait a hundred years and couldn't ask.
It's secret secret
won't tell YOU.
Don't dare. You dare yourself to dare
and then you do.
They turn and... What's the game? You are.
And it's Sticks And Stones
and you're on your own
and it's Piggy In The Middle
and the piggy is YOU.
3.
It wasn't so much the stones 
I loved, aged nine. 
It was the word archaeology. 
It was books pocked with diagrams 
like pawprints round the bins 
in last night's snow; 
they showed circles complete 
with the things that weren't there:
post holes, lost stones... 
like the scene of the crime, 
the victim's parting gesture 
plotted on the pavement,
or the files the dentist kept on me 
and everyone, living and dead 
cheek by jowl in his metal safe. 
Like the shudder and thrill 
when I read in the paper: 
'They identified him by his teeth.'
4.
We're back to back
in a circle of stones
like a stopped clock, 
gap-toothed cogs, 
and whatever's the time
we can't tell any more
than the face knows 
what it's showing.
If the sky can see
what figure our two bodies
make together it's not letting on.
I don't want to turn, 
one more click of the ratchet. 
If we could hold perfectly still...
But the sun and stars and other 
working parts work on. A grain 
of quartz winks with its perfect timing.
We can't see the shadows move;
they will touch one of us before the other 
no matter how close we huddle, 
equally afraid 
it might be me, it might be you.
5.
They've left their imprints in the rain
even larger than they were
as if the stones
had been whistled off, called home
to lie down with their masters
and there's only
their shadows left standing, hugely 
patient but shuffling slightly
- or is it just
flurries and gusts of the rain? They shift
from foot to foot like the queue
for the very last bus.
6.
Now you see them... Now you don't. 
The more you think you see, the more you stare.
The more the shutter clicks, the less they're there.
The final trick!
We'll need several thousand volunteers.
A million tons of concrete.
Cast a bald and bare
sarcophagus and seal them deep, 
safe as nuclear waste.
Let there be steps like an Aztec pyramid
and on the top a pyre
to which processions of the unemployed
will bring every photograph and postcard, 
all the evidence. A tourist guide or two
will be sacrificed (with simultaneous translation).
It will be dreadful. It will be taboo.
Then let the rumours begin. A hint. A joke
in poor taste. Let there be dubious
old men at dusk nudging over the mound
with their hazel twigs twitching. And in bus-
shelters and bike sheds let young whispers start.
The true Stonehenge will rise
again, story by story, faithfully
restored in all its glory:
whopping lies.
Frost Fair
fires on the ice
tonight's the night
for fighting cock and baited bull and dancing bear
men swallowing swords
and tugs of war
and everyone who's anyone is there
we're talking entertainment now we're talking the big show
we're talking tricks and treats we're talking kicks
we're talking the Now scene talking like there's no tomorrow
we're talking pleasure cruises on the River Styx
fires on the ice
tonight's the night
there's everything to sell and none to spare 
and everything's more 
than we can afford
we'll blow the lot tonight and we won't care 
we're talking business now we're talking the big deal
we're talking quick bucks talking Futures talking Gilts 
we're talking Big Bang talking big risks talking the Big Wheel 
we're talking greasy poles and dwarves on stilts
fires on the ice
tonight's the night
for preachers peddling their whys and wares
the hangman's drop
and whip the top
the dark beyond the fire, the hungry stares 
we're talking bigshots bigwigs talking pride before the fall 
we're talking tightrope walkers strongmen quacks
we're talking walking on the water talking anything at all
we're talking hopscotch don't step on the cracks 
fires on the ice
tonight's the night
there's red smoke rising in the glassy air
the ice may creak 
beneath our feet 
we'll dance with frost and ashes in our hair
Enter A Poet
So there they were, 
tete-a-tete with a candle. 
Could it be...? Yes, 
Truth and Beauty!
They were just like in the pictures, 
in profile, at least.
They were deep in each other's eyes. 
He was drinking her in:
“But darling, you're so
beautiful!” She clinked 
his glass: “Oh 
darling, you're so true...”
That's when they noticed me.
“Mind if I join you?”
Beauty's face set in a scowl;
Truth muttered, “Actually 
we were just leaving.”
The candle went out, too.
The Tale of “You” and “I”
'Je est un autre.' Rimbaud.
If 'I' is another
then who is this lover
called 'You', this soul-mate, shadow-mother?
Let's play I-spy
on 'You' and 'I'
as they meet by the winding and whispering Wye.
It's a strange affair
as we follow them there
to a shifty hotel in the back streets of Ware.
We're quick to spot
them (too casually) jot 
in the guest book: 'Mr and Mrs Watt.'
How who touches whom
in that inner room
depends on the guilts that we presume
and innocence
is no defence 
against the eavesdropping of Whither & Whence
(our private eyes
hired to surprise
the naked truth in this tissue of lies).
We burst the door
but find no more
than quotation marks strewn on the floor.
Our birds have flown.
We're on our own
but the doubts conceived that night have grown 
into waifs and strays
who dog our days
with their questionmark claws and wise-child gaze,
whom we can't shoo, 
who will always pursue 
the 'You' in me... the 'I' in you...
Wednesday's Child
Washed up on the shores of Wednesday
the nearly new lamp stand sat
in a puddle of gloom
in an empty room
in its pink silk tasselled hat.
And no-one had bothered to tell him 
when the time of day went past.
She'd been tempted to knock
but the grandfather clock
had told her to run on home fast.
And the door bell might have mentioned
but his batteries were flat as the floor.
He could only speak 
with a whispery creak.
The knocker hung limp on the door. 
The lace curtains twitched at her passing.
The bluebottles fussed at the pane 
and failing to grasp 
the idea of glass 
died of thirst within sight of the rain.
But I'm telling this story on Monday 
and honestly, none of it's true 
and I swear that the guy
who could tell such a lie
isn't me, and not thinking not thinking not thinking
not me and not thinking of you.
Secret Garden
Round and round the garden
like a Teddy bear
one step two step
fall into a snare
mummy's making mantraps
daddy stays away
watch your step 
that's what bears say
daddy's gone a-hunting
bought a rabbit skin
bloody on the inside
to wrap his baby in
hiding in the brambles
no-one knows we're there
don't start crying
stupid bear
round and round the garden 
year on year on year
keep mum stay dumb
hurting under here
who locked the gate
who threw away the key
who hears the growls 
of the bear that prowls
round and round and round the garden
inside me?
Shift 
In the city of No
it's one way, lights at Stop or Caution; peristalsis in the belly of the beast makes traffic flow...
Move on
through the precincts of Nor 
past coffee shops where ladies of a certain age meet lives they never had, comparing what they never wore.
Move on
down the high street of Nope
past street-squatters in battle fatigues, with inflammable eyes, with lean dogs given just enough rope. 
Move on 
round the ring road of Nay.
Billposters flense a huge grin, barbers mowing lines of shaving foam and skin that falls like tickertape. 
Move on 
past the dockside at Null.
Bags, drowned fish, condoms, years float by beneath the mugger's eye, the rag and bone cry, of the blackback gull. 
Move on, move on. 
In the poolhalls of Nil 
a lean lad stretches like a leopard out along his cue. Crunch of the balls like the bones of the kill.
Move on.
When the city of No 
shuts one eye for the night, with a sound of trouble breathing, when a sudden doorway steams as if it's all about to blow
don't wait to be told. 
Just go.
Grace Notes
1.
Play it again... 
Sure thing ma'am. 
I'll unzip a grin six octaves wide. 
See me tickle those ivories 
till they hurt. See me rinsing my fingers 
in palpable hit. As time goes by 
the soundtrack spits and lurches 
out of sync. The keyboard ripples 
like oiled pectorals while I 
(won't you bend close and whisper 
the words in my ear?) mime. 
See me mug and smile. 
2.
Two one-man bands
set their pitches on opposite pavements.
Two males of the species
they glare.
One, harmonica wired
to his head like a chrome grin, 
kazoo like a fly's snout,
shifts his feet
with the champ of a cymbal.
Both their drums palpitate. 
They advance towards each other
slowly. Silence
rings the spot where they are bound to meet.
3.
The girl with the Walkman 
screws her eyelids shut
as if to keep the sound in. 
Bass rattles her bones; 
the treble leaks out 
like the sweeping up of crockery
when the couple upstairs 
have had one of their tiffs. 
(When they make it up later 
in their rusty bed
it's like a woodwork-
for-beginners class 
knocking up a pig pen
with a pig already in it.)
4.
How-could-you-do-this-
to-me eyes, jowls like a threadbare sofa, 
the waiter looked round 
and seeing no-one 
in the place but us, and us snug 
in our corner of evening 
as if it was home, 
sat down to nurse a mandolin
no bigger than a ladle, 
tweaked a plectrum 
from behind his ear, bent close
as if threading a needle 
and began to quiver. 
His sackfuls of shoulders, his thighs
on the edge of his stool, 
the chinks of light 
in empty glasses, all went tremolo
around the still point 
of his plastic plectrum. 
We didn't have the heart to ask 
for our bill. Remember?
Maybe you don't. 
Maybe it wasn't you. The place 
closed three weeks later. 
5.
Saved from the grindstone round
of fairgrounds, Mister Mephisto's 
Mighty Musical Machine 
needs a home. Someone to lag 
his pipes and not mind when his breath 
comes short, to clean
behind panels where wires knot and rust, 
stops glottal on and off and rotted 
valves squit steam, 
someone, impossibly, old enough 
to have bucked on gilded horses, young enough
to believe they might be what they seem.
6.
The Human Body, Illustrated - 
that was one to read beneath the sheets. 
I never reached the rude bits. 
I got stuck on diagrams 
that flayed us page by page:
the wetsuit of muscles, the veins 
like cracks and creepers on a folly, 
the worm-casts of gut 
and the taut strings of nerves, 
this twangling instrument 
that's all I've got 
to serenade you, like a cafe gypsy 
with no violin 
but the bared cords of his arm
as he bobs to your table. 
Carves his bow. Madame 
wants music? The cadenza 
winces into, is it 
love? as if it was the one sure thing.
The Song of the House
Who'll take these rooms, who'll rake the cinders in my hearth
the house said, who can fill me?
I, said the tongue of flame, I'll lick you into shape. 
No, said the house, your kind of love would kill me. 
I, said the wind, just leave a little pane 
unlocked, I'll air you through, 
I'll blow your memories away. No, said the house, 
you'd leave me with no thoughts but thoughts of you. 
I, said the rain, I'll stroke you, skin to skin, 
I'll treat you to a grey bouquet 
of mould in every room, I'll weep with every crack. 
No, said the house, you'd leach my strength away.
I, said the earth, I've waited, waited, wooing you 
with gravity, a love as true as lead, 
let go and let me hold you. No, said the house, 
nobody gets up smiling from your bed. 
And then the emptiness walked in, without a word, 
and later we moved in, love, you and I.
There's this place in each other we can't have 
or hold: uncurtained windows, hoards of sky.
The End of the End of the Pier Show
Undressing alone 
in a room he won't remember 
he's joggling on one leg
trying to kick crumpled jeans 
like a slobbery dog 
away. They won't let go, 
then drop and won't 
lie down, but keep the form 
of crotch and thigh, 
still warm, as if 
he'd peeled himself off neatly. 
Skin. Face. Smile. 
It's the end of the show 
and in some back-
stage hole 
a mirror 
framed in bare bulbs stares 
across the dressing table, blank 
as a poker fiend's face. 
The name on the posters 
has let himself out 
by the back way 
locking up behind. Beneath 
the planks beneath his feet 
foam sucks on girders. 
Anglers hunched in a row 
don't turn as he passes, 
punters queuing all night for a show 
that's already sold out 
and no-one told them . 
At the passport-photo booth 
he tries the slot 
out of habit, just in case 
there's a face to spare. 
He frisks himself 
for 10p. There's always his friend 
for a moment like this - 
the ghost, his friend 
the ghost in the Speak Your Weight machine.
7.
THE WASTING GAME
(1994-1998)
Visiting Persephone
Can you picture him
going down to see her, fitting in
with the difficult visiting times?
He was her father, after all.
But to enter that dark, 
that mould and mouldering, his power 
and glory threatening to wink out 
like a fused bulb with a pinging whine
would tax a better god than him.
She is yellowish pale this week 
with a drained look, no pink 
but some fresh scars on her arm, 
the others aged to shrivelled plum. 
She has keelhauled herself by inches 
or been crawling down narrowing 
ducts of slime and shale. 
Some days she hardly greets him 
and her silence is a waiting room 
where he sits and is not called for, 
feeling younger than she is, learning 
to make out the shapes in her gloom. 
The gifts he foisted on her 
leave him dull, a Souza march 
come shuffling to a halt 
outside the darkened concert hall 
where a child's violin 
slips on difficult scales, 
then you look and there's no-one. 
He gets up to go, go 
where? How could he have imagined
he was any sort of god? How could he 
have imagined this at all? 
The Sick Child
after Munch
Looking down from the snowfields 
of her pillow, she scarcely seems drawn, 
rather, scratched on the skin
of the canvas till blood comes.
No, mother, she'll take nothing 
from you now. Words least of all.
You brought her into this, 
which leaves you at her mercy and
she's merciless. Head bowed, kneeling, 
you're as faceless as a shadow thrown
by her face that's red-rimmed, 
a house burning down,
fire stoving out window after window, 
up to the one where a child 
about to be consumed 
and knowing it, does not 
call, cry, speak out of turn 
or take her eyes off you 
but is good, as always, gazing out 
onto the wastes of childhood 
like a rainy afternoon.
The Wasting Game
1.
'I'm fat, look, fat...'
Yes and the moon's made of cheese, 
that chunk she won't touch in the fridge
dried, creviced, sweating in its cold
like someone with a killing fever. 
Half a scrape-of-marmite sandwich, 
last night's pushed-aside
potatoes greying like a tramp's teeth, 
crusts, crumbs are a danger to her, 
so much orbiting space junk 
that's weightless for only so long. 
Burn it up on re-entry, burn it, 
burn it. So she trains 
with weights, she jogs, she runs 
as if the sky was falling. 
2.
Curled like a lip, a crust dries in the bin, 
the supermodel's come-on-don't-touch sneer 
for the camera - desire 
caught, teased, time and again 
till all the wants run dry 
and there's only this rictus, 
a cat raking claws 
down the arm of the chair, 
eyes closed, lips apart 
like the girl's head she drew 
arching back to a lover's long 
bone fingers tangled in her hair. 
3. 
The eating thing: 
the slouching beast 
that's come to stay, 
to spatter the slops 
and foul the manger, 
to snap at the hand 
that tries to feed it, so 
we leave it and we lie 
in darkness, trying not to know, 
not to hear it gnawing 
in the next room, gnawing 
itself to the bone.
4.
Dry priestess at the shrine 
of nothing. Maid-saint 
fierce against the flesh
(burn it, burn it) denouncing 
the witch in herself, see, 
she's mounting the stake, 
no, becoming it and
the tinder and the heartless
blaze you might mistake 
for holiness. My homegrown 
Manichee, almost 'perfected' 
as the Cathars had it 
fasting unto death. 'I want 
a perfect figure.' Saying no 
to the pull of the world. 
Straight out, she said it 
(burning but not yet 
consumed) she said 'Weight 
is bad. Bad.' On the blanket. 
In the desert of her bed.
5.
To be perfect...? 'Nothing's 
perfect in this life,' I say. 
Mealy middle-aged wisdom, 
eat your words. See how 
precisely she'll come to agree.
6.
Close now, this nothing-
hungry thing that fills 
her, that empties her... Once 
in aquarium twilight a grey-
silver bass brought a face 
big as mine up to the glass, 
chewing water, with the weight 
of deep ocean behind it. The cold. 
Its tuppeny eye had a gleam 
like contempt. For me? Or worse:
maybe its own reflection in the glass 
was all it saw?
7.
It's the Dark Ages now. I believe 
in possession, in demons that speak 
in crone voices out of 15-year-old lips, 
her lips that have taken a tuck in 
at the corner, a small crease like age 
or disapproval when she (seldom) smiles. 
I believe fairy tales like hot news,
how the Snow Queen's pinched 
enraptured child might desire 
nothing but to spell ETERNITY 
from jags of ice, how Rumplestiltskin 
with the rage of any secret thing 
that's named for what it is 
might stamp so hard the splintering 
could go on for ever, 
how the scientists at Los Alamos 
watched the fireball grow 
and thought: it might ot stop, 
it might consume us all.
8.
She's been paying her dues to gravity 
in dud coin once a week 
checking in on the doctor's scales 
which wobble to a judgment: holding steady
though she's less and less able to hoist 
what mass she still has, and she sways, 
the rush of faintness in her ears like sea 
hissing in over mud and in and in 
as she steadies herself and walks towards it 
with stones in her pockets, adding one a week.
9.
Inside her, the slowing, 
the faltering 
voltage. 
But still 
there's this brilliant 
flicker on the surface, 
arc lights 
on a dragged canal, 
moving pictures 
that don't quite
finesse the eye; 
there are moments 
you almost see through 
(freeze there) 
when the screen 
shows nothing but a grey 
room and gradually 
shapes, near-transparent, 
near familiar, 
like the threadbare home video 
mailed with impossible demands. 
You see the hostages, 
a family, 
staring out at you.
10.
Ketones: a sour chemical smell on her skin 
like a darkroom with blackouts on windows, 
with shallow trays of fluid silky-still 
as a swimming pool after lights-out, 
their monochromes hardening. Developed, 
they will close the family album. 
11.
I could hate
those frail maids fading beautifully 
in books, wax lilies, pale-succulent 
stalks that might snap 
at a touch. The bird-dropping of blood 
in a lace-bordered handkerchief 
like the monstrance on the nuptual sheet. 
A consummation most devoutly wished 
by death. The maiden turns, 
in woodcuts from another age 
of plagues, to his knuckleboned touch, 
half smiling; the consumptive turns 
on her lace-bordered pillow 
weakly and away 
from any warmth of flesh 
as if stung; the anorexic turns 
her face towards these stories, stories 
which, because I love the girl, 
I hate.
12.
She left home months ago. 
Somehow we never noticed. 
She was going solo 
as a conjuror:
the egg we found rotting 
in the body-folds of the sofa; 
caked wads 
of tissues in the bin with weetabix 
compacted in them like the Mob's 
car-crusher sandwiches;
potatoes spirited away 
with one pass of the baggy-wristed 
sweater she draped 
on her bones. (What applause 
when she whips it off one day 
and she's gone!) Co-ordination 
slipping now, caught out -
fraud, fraud! - 
she plays the cheapest trick of all. 
A toothmug of tap water, 
sixty paracetamol. 
She tries hissing herself offstage. 
13. 
Drip. Drip. 
Those stripped 
twigs of her fingers. 
Ivy torsions in the wrist. 
Two spikes bandaged 
to drip in her veins.
Sap sunk 
at fifteen, she's been old
for too long, always cold
in her matt blacks, always 
in some sort of mourning.
Mulched like leafmould, 
mushroom-breathed, shit-smelling, 
she's a question: Can 
you love this?
Can you sit 
and watch the hours dissolving 
in the drip 
of Parvolax and glucose
clear as rinsings from bare twig tips 
when the downpour's gone?
They're trying to wash the river 
in her blood. They're on the phone 
to the Poisons Unit: 
the readings aren't clear. 
Nothing's perfect 
but it's all there is. 
This. Now. The drip 
of plain words. Yes. 
Love. 
This.
Ledge
She's lodged here, somehow -
just a bed's width, dizzyingly high. 
The mist pours up, sea clatters
trolleys in a lift shaft and their why...? 
and when you're better are as clear 
as a seal's cough and as odd. She could even reply 
but she's using her time here to study the language of birds; 
she's so light and hollow and her eye 
so sharp that sometimes in the mist 
she catches the glint of a zero-thickness steel wire cry 
she could slip down and away, a miles-long glide. 
Just a step to the edge and she'll fly.
Imago 
She spent winter and spring 
in her chrysalis, a strait world 
shrunk and puckered like a mis-stitched scar. 
Inside it held a breaking down of things 
like a drop of original swamp sea. 
Which is one way not to speak 
of unopening windows resigned to the view 
of the CAUTION PATIENTS CROSSING 
speedbumped drive; the coded sign 
NO CASUALTY DEPARTMENT here 
among so many casualties; 
the swabbed smells and the sounds off 
like that sobbing on legs 
down the corridor, and the dribbling 
overspill from the padlocked pool 
where a green beach ball scuds slow 
eccentric orbits 
to the pipe and back and round...
*
Hawk moth caterpillars 
dropped from the limes in our street, 
pointless manna she'd save 
like the good girl she was, 
on damp earth in a jamjar. 
They shrank to sealed flasks 
for the usual great experiment. 
We found a blood-brown drip 
in the husk where one vanished; 
another that, shrink-
wrapped too tight in itself, 
couldn't ever split free.
So seeing her now
rise from the station subway
with bags marked for home, 
to the lip of the crowd, and hesitate, 
not a child now, and not any image 
I could make to hold her, 
I can't call her name, 
I can't find words for her, 
I wouldn't dare.
Trebizond
Some days nothing about him seems worth preserving. 
He's a marker that slips from a library book
and who'll ever know who had to meet Jenny
at 3! or where or why the exclamation
or what pages their meeting was parting?
He's all footnotes, a boneyard of keys 
at the back of the drawer as if their true 
suitcases might come back to claim them. 
He's all those rainy lunchtimes interleaved 
between Classics and History when he'd been fourteen 
for ever, working through to the last 
appendix of The Roman Empire In The East, 
to the last ragged flutter of purple 
nailed to a last-ditch trading post in Asia Minor. 
Some days nothing about him seems to justify 
these leaps of faith: that Jenny met the one 
with the key to her life; that you, dear Reader, you 
might read this; that there's a hectare of stones 
and goat-scrub where an old man wears a name
like Kasar or Cezur by direct succession
and his hayloft's a leafmould of edicts
rummaged from Byzantium; that the swot in the specs 
might have made it past 1453. Some days 
he just clings to a word, any word, say: Trebizond. 
Tail
That's them: a soured-cream Escort 
in the Tesco carpark. That's them 
loading the bottle bank straight from the boot:
him and her, faces blanker 
than stocking-masked bandits 
as they play its holes like fruit machines, 
without speaking or turning. 
That's how many plonk bottles, 
how many asking-a-few-friends-rounds 
go down the hatch 
with a blink of the flap? Smack of glass. 
An after-quiver like a slammed piano.
Now the Escort nudges 
into rank with fifty others, 
noses in, rumps out like cows put to stud. 
And now I'm waiting as the twitchy 
reflex of the automatic doors 
clocks them in. Let's quiz the loading bay 
for clues: that leaning pagoda 
of cardboard crates, the roulette sound 
of a stout bottle rolling to and fro. 
All circumstantial. But I'm close, 
got what's left of the day 
backed up against the wall 
and each muffled shatter 
from the bottle bank is me 
ramming its head back: OK buddy, 
spill the beans, thud, 
are they happy? thud, thud, tell me 
everything you know.
Thou' 
Thou' : a thousandth of an inch (Engineering)
A case of key and keyhole, 
us: what clicks 
or doesn't in a place not seen
until they're bits 
dismantled, springs spilled everywhere; 
when edges crisp 
as cornflakes once don't always kiss; 
what jams or slips 
fumbled after the party, wrong door, 
sorry; what fits 
in the gullet or sticks like a glove,
depending how
precisely the spaces between us 
are tooled - 
to a tolerance, let's say, 
of the nearest thou'.
Nineteenseventysomething
We Scotchtaped Cuban posters 
round the attic walls. The wretched of the earth 
made fists above us as we slept.
On damp nights they peeled slowly off
with a throat-clearing sound
like a more tactful hint than we deserved.
It was a house of all angles but right. 
All the junk shops in Brighton 
couldn't find furniture odd enough to fit. 
Our chairs looked ill at ease, as if about to go. 
When we pinned up our Indian bedspread, 
pre-faded like jeans, it could have been 
the clothes-horse tent I played house in 
before they invented the Sixties. 
Us, we'd never marry. We were outlaws 
lying low, unscrewing the legs of our bed
against mother's advice. Turning back 
from the smell of your body and mine 
newly moistened like parched earth 
I snuffed carpet dust and damp. 
Nights made up most of that year .
And that voice through the wall from next door 
where the curtains stayed shut. 
Unseen, endless and scourging: 
'Little bugger. I'll learn you...' 
She was our age or less, 
her four-year-old inaudible, 
nearly invisible even when we saw him 
and we had no words for this either 
so came round to not mentioning it 
but got into heavier music, Led Zep, 
Wishbone Ash, and got on with the loss 
of our childhoods, at leisure, urgently 
before our grants ran out. 
It never crossed our minds that we'd begun. 
Spirit Level
Here on the sinking edge of England
the stones range from hipjoints to knucklebones. 
There's a scarp drop, then the North Sea 
cants uphill and how 
the tankers tightropewalk that skyline 
is beyond me; I'm wobbly as the bubble 
in a spirit level, ungrounded, and nothing's 
quite straight or quite true. 
The Ness is a name and a notion, shifty 
as the North Magnetic Pole. I've walked since teatime, 
dogged as a number-crunching mainframe 
on its quest for God 
rounded down to the Highest Prime Number; 
the coast slips away round the corner for ever
in front and behind. It could shrug us all off 
into space: me, 
this toy village with its late-night postcard shop, 
this house like the fo'c'sle of a beached brigantine 
with uncaulked planks that would rot in a year 
(or so the landlord says)
if it weren't for the draughts; that single car 
on the Front where a glow like cave moss up 
from the dashboard lights two faces, lovers
who have come to sit
and not speak and stare opposite ways. 
Both ways, the sea is coming. We're crockery 
slipped to the edge of a tilting table but so slowly
who'd notice, until...? 
That clatter's not the bells of Dunwich 
three miles out, not the family silver being rifled, 
more like cutlery shrugged into stainless-steel vats 
behind canteen roller-blinds
in a hospital no-one can see their way out of, 
or the school you're always back at in your dreams, 
or the idea of the Self, or the United Kingdom plc,
you know, any crumbling institution.
Nature Studies
1. Fern Charm
Protect us from the rage of ferns,
from the baby's clenched fist, 
from the cobra's hood. From the spring 
of the set trap, from the slippy 
grip-curl of octopus limbs, 
protect us. Say Hart's-tongue
Hart's-tongue as if words 
might lick the newborn 
season into shape. Protect us 
from the Spring. 
2. Foxgloves at Dungeness
Zero
minus one... Ignition 
and a blaze of purple 
powering up... 
Green bud-tips, 
all that thrust 
beneath them, hang 
on the critical seconds 
of lift-off, 
on a whim of windspeed, 
between hungry earth 
and empty sky.
3. Dragonfly Tanka 
Oil-film wings, false depths
in its hologram eyes, dead 
still: a gold-wire brooch 
for you... At a touch, it rips 
off, like a lit fuse, sizzling. 
4. Sundew
Drops of honeyspit
between the sundew's teeth.
A forty poster bed 
pink-lit velvety green, 
fringed, musky. Fly,
he fancies he can see 
himself, shrink-wrapped 
in surface tension, 
in each globe of mucus, 
whole and looking out; 
he fancies it could be
a gem, a gift for her.
Or her, or her. Eternity, 
he'll say, a solitaire.
5. Limpets at Wylfa
One tense: the present. 
One will : to grip. 
One muscle clenched. 
One shell
that grinds to fit 
the facts of stone. 
One story time 
will tell.
Beach Party
Just a little too much, maybe, of everything
a beach should have: miles, 
bleached as a salt pan and flat as forever. 
In long-shot, a dune buggy seems to come 
and come straight on and gets no nearer,
riding the bucks and the slumps,
sand spattering hindwards, doggie-fashion. 
Whines of wheelspin join the littler squeals 
of party animals. The wide-screen backdrop 
has lavender mud tints like the veins of eyelids. 
(You could market it as Twilight.) 
Now, a touch of blusher. Nightfall 
ups the treble, cuts the bass. 
Their laughter goes like oystercatchers 
winking out of range; their headlight beam 
is trying to prise the dark up like a stone.
It stalls and goes dim. All round, 
a faint prickling sigh 
like metal cooling: wormcasts, 
pocks and pores. The water table darkens upwards, 
raising salts like a mineral dream
and razor shells and crab backs 
blemishing the clean sweep
like those longship burials in sand 
that nothing but their slight impurities 
give definition and, as soon as seen, 
dry, bleach and blow away. 
A Detail from Bosch
Meadow cranesbill, tiny monster, 
a stork's head in plant form... 
and I'm back in the Garden 
of Earthly Delights, in Sundays 
at Aunt Bea's, never-ended - say 
Thank You, say Please - 
and the cave-dripping tut of her clock. 
I hid behind her sofa 
with The World's Great Paintings,
guiltily possessed by 
(worse than Playboy) those live 
strutting bagpipe bladders, 
the dismantled hangar of that torso, 
head still smiling as it turned. 
The cruelty: how all flesh, stripped down,
might become something other, 
and Aunt Bea's plucked neck 
one of the ones I saw 
hung by their claws in Mack the butcher's;
how a life could come 
to pecking old grit, the stab of a kiss
I winced from, cruelly.
Dry
St Michan's crypt, Dublin
Smiles not to be argued with, 
queasing me forward... Go on, 
he won't bite. Each tour on the hour 
had to proffer a child 
to the side of his thin box bed. 
The grown-ups rippled, 
clockwork gathering to strike. 
I stood; he lay 
as befitted our stations, him 
six hundred years my senior, 
Sir No-one-now, Knight. The hand 
he granted to me like a favour 
(glossed with other people's sweat)
felt like a Guy's twig glove.
I'd glued Airfix models 
with more life to them than this:
canvas skin, bone struts, 
just a stiff-necked refusal 
quite to be a skeleton. 
The flashbulbs winced. 
The guide held out her palm. 
I thought of this today 
in the woods after rain, in a clearing 
of sawdust and sunlight.
There was the mystery: steam 
from a cut stump mingling up 
into all shapes and none, life,
a pan boiling dry.
A Scorcher
Walk, don't jog: it's official. 
Don't let the kids play out. 
Don't breathe the air. Reactions 
simmered in a pan of ozone smog 
dissolve our boundaries; across the life/
not-life line molecules begin to fraternise
like a breaking of ranks in the trenches. 
So we cough and slow.
We cover up. Overexposed
we check for shadows on the skin. 
In the ultraviolet light of what we know 
the future begins to look pale
as the Middle Ages. Grey faced girls 
with thighs no wider than their knees
appear in our midst now
like omens of famine, bruise-eyed 
like the worn-down wives 
they'd rather die than be. 
And we learn to adapt. Betray 
no more than awkward sympathy 
when someone's toddler in the crowded bus 
fights a strangle of asthma, 
scrabbling and slipping on each breath 
like a loosening scree.
Persons Unknown
This is the Pier Point Hotel and they 
are the only residents.
It's more exclusive now than 5-star 
since the Council whacked up hardboard 
on the downstairs, and the UNSAFE STRUCTURE sign.
The Receiver's got his hands full, what 
with weighing an antheap of debts 
against goods that get less with each slither 
of shale, each crump of a wave on the cliff. 
It was a wet night they teased back the wire 
just enough for a calor gas stove and a bedroll 
and themselves. By morning the flit of them 
at an upstairs window and that cat-at-the-back-door 
baby's cry was proof, if proof were needed:
once land starts slipping it goes to the bad, 
good riddance. Remember how the Clifftop Bar 
broke out in an acne of under-age drinking 
and the landlord took to serving in his vest, 
his cheeks rusting from the inside like a wreck 
at high-water? Now these fly-by-night squatters 
had a cranked-out bus, one with sacks on the windows 
and a dog like frayed wire, didn't they? Well, no, 
but these things soon appeared 
somewhere nearby where no-one could see them.
*
It may be the Pier Point Hotel but you 
don't figure, you're a blank 
on the inventory. You 
among fixtures and fittings 
like the cherry plush bar 
with its paunched look, its buttons 
gone missing like teddy bears' eyes. 
Yes, you, putting your boots up 
in the cork tiled alcoves, 
you, squelching the pump handles 
(marked with a price per pint 
that nails their last pull to the month 
sure as carbon dating.)
Kicking the steel kegs, you, 
you'd sup the dregs, you'd spoon them 
to the baby when it creaks by night. 
Why don't you answer? Or appear 
at a balcony window like royalty, to bless us 
with a V-sign? Thanks to you 
folk lie awake all hours, listening 
for the raves you must surely 
foment out of nowhere 
like maggots in meat. Why can't we hear?
*
Final guests of the Pier Point Hotel we 
go on tiptoe for no reason. 
Or spread arms and whoosh 
down the corridor laughing 
as if there were maids stepping out 
from every bedroom, tea things 
clattering up off every tray 
like a panic of pigeons. 
But the kid can't be left 
in a room stacked with bust chairs 
and pieces of bidet, where moonlight 
still winkles out glass from the floorboards 
or flatters the gold-look 
of a wire record rack
full of Swing With The Sixties 
Volume 3. We can't talk
but must whisper or shout, 
and the closer we bundle to sleep, 
the more apart we seem. 
Last night each of us thought we woke 
to find the other missing 
and knew where to look: through the door 
we shouldn't open to the Clifftop Bar, 
with no window, no frame and no wall 
where the mould-patterned Axminster frays 
in a bite like stringy celery. 
At our feet, a faint whicker of gulls... 
A few slipped off to circle leisurely 
as cream in stirred coffee. Beneath 
rose a pale blotch of foam. 
When I was small in bed 
I'd squeeze my eyelids tight, 
half afraid of the space in my head 
where the nebulas came like that and kept on coming.
Postcards, West Bay
after a photograph by Martin Parr
These are the last days. And these are the signs.
And nothing is by chance.
These are the cards, the Tarot of the times.
We shuffle, heads bent, 
round the white wire racks. These wayside shrines.
These icons. Faithfulness on its settee
is figured by The Poodle
gazing where the coal-look fire must be,
his master's voice. The same
fire lights The Fluffy Kitten's eyes, though she
is a type of the Snow Leopard, captured 
at the entrails of her prey,
a party streamer tangle. Here is The Thatcher 
on the crest of his new fire risk,
hand raised like the poodle's paw. What rapture 
is prepared for him, for all who understand 
the correspondences: the buffed-
up green steam locomotive and the two-in-hand
plough team converging
on a final point? The point is where we stand 
in late light, colours heightened, sights for sore
eyes, eczema'd.
Salve us. Everything we see is slightly raw.
Don't scratch the surface, 
it'll scar. Who made the red shift, and what for, 
what hopes and brochures drew us to West Bay
(Look to the West. The West
declines.) and booked us in and made us stay
and made us see how everything
bleeds, bleed, these last days, bleeds away.
A Liminal State
1.Documentary
Five Aeroflot sky-tubs by the lumpy runway 
sport blue-and-white paint now: ESTONIAN AIR.
Like gulls with a storm in the offing
they face the same way at the wind. 
There are trains cut in half at the border 
like worms; an independent engine 
pulls out from the platform while its rolling stock 
stays Russian. Lines have to be drawn 
like today: PAKA (bye for now, 
not quite adieu) flyposts most walls
with a Red Army helipad cap, a walrus neck
that seems an easy target from behind.
Like kids with their parents' cameras
there are families posed edgily outside 
the place people tried not to mention, 
with a name plate saying anything but KGB.
The barracks is a film set waiting 
for a new producer and a cast of thousands.
The windows are kicked out from the inside, 
bunk rooms trashed. Here's half a skip of uniforms.
Round the base, there's been a fly-buzz of types 
in leather jackets all this last year, 
men in a small way of business but expanding 
and with foreign friends. Out there in the bay 
ochre hulks have faced home up the Gulf of Finland
for months as if waiting the word.
(The Moscow-Tallinn post goes quicker 
these days via London.) 
Beneath the stained ziggurat 
of the Olympic Pride yachting complex 
a sharp Finnish hydrofoil suns its wings. 
A car ferry trots out in the team's new colours 
and is not yet anybody's news.
2.The Bronze Age
A nod, in passing, to the scar
in the park where all the paths
converge on nothing
but a ten-foot concrete square
gouged up like a bad extraction, 
shreds of tooth, steel nerve-ends
sheared off proud
to the ground, not safe for children.
It nags like the place where the pain
has been and gone, the lost limb 
still tapping its fingers,
still humming the old refrain.
There's a clutch of Lenins in the cellar 
of the town museum, faced everywhichway 
to the future, some reclining, 
most declaiming, deafly. Quite a conspiracy...
Still, their splintered soles would slot 
back onto the scars of their plinths
snug as a numb foot
in a snowboot. They're kept, no, not
ust in case, for as long as it takes 
for History to lose that old capital H
like a crime on its head,
for all this to be lower-case, just history.
One night the Bronze Age began. A van 
skulked up an alley finger-picking clean
every public memorial.
Slogans stuttered into silence. Scrap men 
made a killing. The great names and dates 
lost their memory, letter by letter, 
leaving pinholes in the slabs
like Braille, or the undeciphered script
in the newly-excavated sanctum, which might
if you let your focus blur, just fall
into pattern and sense.
Might be a curse, the writing on the wall.
3.Liminal
The rackety bus has shaken us down 
like a washing machine soothes fretful 
babies, down to there-there mutterings 
on the edge of sleep, so low I can't tell 
which is Estonian, which Russian. 
Straight through flat land, the road's dull
as the proof that Zeno's arrow never strikes. 
There's a tree without a trunk, a stonepile
like a reef, in low mist. Puddles 
of brightness rise as darkness falls, 
in measure like a physical equation. 
Memories of marsh seep back, subliminal,
till it's white to the black rim of woods 
under darkening blue, like the national 
flag. In one already-changing moment 
droplet after droplet casts its individual 
vote to be mist. The road is a causeway
waiting for a wave of it to curl
up and over. Now. We hit the brightness 
and we're in it and it's gloom and chill 
and half the night to go. The driver hums 
to keep awake, no words, all 
low throat voice, no tune.
4. Heart Stones
The driver pulls us over 
somewhere north of Poltsamaa 
to introduce us to a stone
as if it was royalty. 
He shuts off the engine
and turns, gravely beaming.
Ten thousand boulders 
in a tiny land but one, this one, 
no other, is transfigured 
by grace of (surer than verse) 
geometry: dead-centre,
the heart of the homeland 
though there's not a house in sight.
If those disputed hectares in the east 
were ceded, would this centre hold?
Would they trundle it west in a truck?
At once the fields around look papery, 
crumpled, a map stroked out flat 
with this boulder for paperweight, 
and a stiff wind riffling at the edges. 
A slap and a rip and it could fly away.
*
Turn aside from the dull road to Narva, 
down the bank: those puddles of stones,
waist deep, grey overlapping rings 
like lichen, with nothing to tell them 
from every field's scraped-up pile
like dustpan sweepings -nothing 
but what's walled precisely at the core. 
There, a two-metre fridge-freezer box
for the big cheese with his gravegoods. 
Here, suitcase size, 
twin matching gaps in the bloodline, 
nobody's ancestors. It's the spaces 
at the heart that place us, not the edge 
that crumbles as the freight rolls by.
5.International Relations
The deep-pile hush
of moss. All round us 
tingling resonance of spruce.
I can't utter a word 
for fear it lasts and lasts.
'You English,' she says, 
'I can't tell from American
these days, always rushing in 
to share your feelings. 
This heart on the sleeve 
(is that right?) can't still 
be beating... Friendship?
The official word for occupation. 
Give me fifty years 
to lose the taste of it, 
I'm sorry...' And later: 
'No wonder your Americans
and Russians understand each other
like the best of enemies. 
They're so alike, 
the type who invite you, 
surprise! to a party 
in your own house. 
If you say you have a headache 
they look hurt - sincerely - 
then kick down the door...'
6.Scorched Earth 
A year or two 
of thistles uncut
and it's theirs: 
first, nettles 
at the borders, bramble 
tripwires, then birches 
like fingers of dazzle 
prising in between 
the warping timbers
to a hayloft's
warm biscuity dark.
Too white, those trees
stepping in over marginal land
between the forest 
and the straight-ruled wheat - 
too bright, as if 
they sucked light up 
to flare it off
like a Statue-of-Liberty 
torch at the oil works, 
smoke by day and fire by night, 
and the earth at their feet
too dark-grained
fifty years on - the ash
of hayloft, house and barn 
feeding grass, feeding 
birch and bramble, feeding 
thistles as sharp as a cough
in a theatre's hush 
before the next act starts. 
7.Forest Brother
(Metsavennad: Forest Brothers - resistance fighters against the Soviet occupation of 1944)
Consider the last of the Forest Brothers
thirty years behind bars 
of spruce or white birch trunks 
that look like a cage from any angle. 
Thirty years of melting through.
Of nesting in the needly itch 
like the last of a species 
listed as extinct 
but still with a price on his pelt.
Of the plush smell of mushrooms 
on the edge of rotting 
and the rush-matting drift 
underfoot and the moss, 
such a hush, just a cough 
and the wood catches cold. 
Consider living like a mouse 
in the soundbox of a violin
among the wind's harmonics, 
being what isn't there 
at the edge of the clearing 
when the dogs bark and the farmer 
chooses not to hear. His war 
comes down to this: to be a dream, 
a bad one, moving in the corner 
of the vision of a dawn 
that has abolished shadows. 
Do dreams itch? Catch cold? 
Or look up by a river, 
with a rucksack and a leather jacket
grinning at two fishermen 
who pass the time of day
and then produce a camera, smile!
and then their KGB credentials. 
August Sabe. 1979. 
His last word is a gulp of air 
in the pool where he jumped 
and stayed under. Consider him 
then consider the last 
Forest Brother but one, who died 
some time earlier, thinking 
'There's still Sabe' - him 
with no name, no photograph, 
so much more rare 
because he could be anyone...
8.In the Bar of the Writers' Union
Back in the bad old days 
I had a job - to say everything 
no-one else would. And they listened 
like kids in a Whispering Gallery 
half afraid of their own voices
scuttling round blank walls and back.
I said too much, of course. 
Even a little was too much - 
these were the bad old days, remember - 
and when the silencers came 
my hush rippled through crowds; 
when I passed down the street 
folk turned to listen. 
 Ah, the bad old days. Now 
I can leave a silence and...
That was one, 
did you notice it? No?
Then I'll say it again.
9.Postsoviet Postmodern 
Vaike-Oismae, Tallinn
Launched by the Soviet Sixties, this scheme 
for a suburb in concentric rings says moon-base, 
says orbiting station: a hand-me-down dream 
from American sci-fi. Remember the Space Race?
Cosmonauts on launchpads in the Khazakh 
dust, pot-roasted in secretly at the state's 
discretion? Now we wake to stains and cracks, 
the creep of concrete cancer much the same
as relicts of the Sixties anywhere: Caracas,
Wandsworth. But vineberry swarms up to claim 
ten storey cliffs, each creeper a ripped seam 
of autumn. Each block wears a shirt of flame.
The Pumping Station's down again; half
Tallinn's hot taps gurgle dry. I'm in an eighth 
floor flat, bussed to a cousin's for a bath. 
On TV, a Mexican dream of L.A.: ghost-
Spanish moves the lips. Curt as an epitaph,
Estonian subtitles. Russian, dubbed almost 
in synch. Slipped through cracks in the scene 
a stray porque? - a weed in a pavement. My host 
has left Womens Day: Australia's Biggest Magazine 
(from other cousins) where I'll see. 'Aussie Man Relates 
Penis Mutilation' 'Diana - Sexpot Or Ice Queen?'
with a Japanese remote control for paperweight.
Outside, there's shrub encroaching. Waste ground. 
A cow at a stake. A dirt track. And a frontier 
with what's gone. That low grassed-over mound 
should be a long barrow, but the door 
is dented steel - a reinforced surround, 
a man-sized catflap. Now we're echoes in a corridor,
an air-raid-shelter hush one step could detonate,
but lined with lock-ups, dozens, like a bullion store. 
Ours rattles up, bumping its counterweight, 
a cylinder block, and there's the family car, 
the great grey Lada like a warrior in state 
among shelves racked with gravegoods, jar on jar 
of gherkin flesh crammed into murky green. 
Lab specimens. And garnet glints: a ruined bar 
of bottles - vodka, 'Churchill's London Gin' -
transfused with redcurrant juice, like every year
in every farm's earth-cellar till the history machine
crashed from the sky and left us stranded here.
 Estonia, September 1994
Babble 
He never asked - 
how could he? - 
but it came with him, 
the gift of tongues,
and they clustered around 
as if astounded, 
totalstrangers bending 
to his buggy in the street. 
Those with ears to hear 
might spot Inuit gutturals, 
sheaves of Slavonic tsh or tsch, 
a glottal click of Xhosa
tangled like all our routes 
out of Africa, forkings of tongues 
into deltas and floodplains. 
They became afraid 
and held up things, 
simple and solid to cling to. 
Teddy, they said, baby, 
mouthing slow and clear 
like trained negotiators
hotlined to the penthouse 
where he'd holed up, Howard Hughes 
of the Babel Hotel 
amongst hung gardens 
and the hammering of gastarbeiter 
workmen; some nights 
a whole storey gives way;
in the morning there's scaffolding, 
power tools, Michael Jackson songs
in Turkish, all channels at once 
on their trannies. No wonder 
that there comes a day 
he chucks it in, throwing the switch 
to cut whole sectors into darkness, 
silence, and comes down 
to their smiles and their camcorders 
whirring like the press corps 
when his lips or tongue chance 
on a Ma or Da.
Kleep
'Think of the birds flying south for the winter, cranes for instance. They fly on and on and on, and it doesn't matter what ideas, big or small, they may have buzzing around inside their heads, they'll still keep on flying... They fly on and on, and what if they do throw up a philosopher? Let them keep their philosophy, so long as they don't stop flying.' Chekhov, Three Sisters.
... or if one of them snagged 
on the frizzly invisible wire 
of a satellite wavelength 
that happened to fill 
the hollows of his beak and skull 
with questions
as the flock closed up and flickered on, 
this one piece 
flaking off and dropping 
on a rain-slicked car park - 
an avocet, one, 
like a whole new thought 
expelled from the mind that hatched it:
what if all this, this snoot of a bill, 
this flashback of black and white 
flagged up as we rise off water, 
each scoop-and-stilt twist 
of the genes, were nothing 
but containers for the word 
kleep kleep 
as it tells us like beads 
on its flightpaths, day and night 
speeding up to the flutter 
of movietone monochrome, 
no intermission, just a soundtrack 
playing on and on to empty stalls?
The Language of the Bird People
unmoved 
out on the edge of utter
North of utter... utter... (try again)
...
unmoved
thin as lace-
makers' bobbins 
their limb-silhouettes 
against a grey lake 
in their punts of bark so flat 
they might be standing on the water 
they compose an alphabet
with the tilt of a spear 
the coil of a cast net 
splash 
though all that reaches here 
at the edge is ripples 
broad and shallow 
truckling at a boulder 
a stipple of reeds 
like a visible rumour 
then again 
the peewit cries they scratch 
on the frosted glass of morning 
once an hour maybe 
unmoving is a message 
cut in lapidary style 
that spells precisely nothing 
we can hope but try
again to guess
... 
Don't credit the tale
that they followed the wild-
fowl north so far 
they left speech behind
like a Victorian explorer's 
folding table, candlesticks and cloth 
abandoned almost sadly
by the last defecting porter. 
But whistles and caws 
are sharper warnings, honks and chirrups
more companionable 
for meaning only that.
Don't think their poets
whittled nightingale cadenzas. 
No, picture them rapt 
in a darkening ring
by the sound of one goose 
cronking with a micro-tonal 
change of pitch
less than a warping of windspeed 
till in a trance beyond boredom 
they were seized 
by the wonder of distance, thoughts
teased into cirrus-thin threads. 
On a poor night they might plan
new destinations; on a good one, 
woken by a rush of wings, 
might find the poet gone. 
... 
strakings of cirrus 
the windpaths 
down which birds will come 
today? no
till the folk brim full of it 
this lacking something 
and the wide high sky 
is one turbulent stream 
of not arriving 
the cloud teased to slaloming tracks 
prickling smitters of sand
swerving over a beach 
a live white shadow 
they squint north 
as if they could see 
in the switch and tease
of wind direction 
something something
call it home
... 
'Tenth night out: serious tundra, bog-
quaking soft. Lashed guyropes to stones.
No chat. By this stage of an expedition 
talking's as much of a slog 
as walking, and less use. Dusk was a seep 
of grey light downwards, puddling in a tarn 
edged with boulders, crosshatched with reeds. 
The other men clocked into sleep 
and missed it: up over the moor 
from the south, a creaking 
like a waggon being trundled, then 
as sudden as the kicking open of a door 
the tarn was a clamour, a claque 
in the front stalls of darkness, 
each separate syllable insisting 
on itself, a shopfloor clang and crack 
of hammering out the likeness 
of a language. A raw spring of speech. 
I stumbled out, my torch beam stubbing 
into bristling wings like the pikes 
of a pitchfork rebellion as their outcry spread 
across the water, circles shuddering 
out and all the voices leaving and the Word, 
if word it was, unsaid...' 
... 
At some point on the road north, 
a divorce 
and another and another... 
Steps to more crisp articulation. 
One group holds north-west
is the true way of the birdpaths,
one hears the wind in the east.
A turn of speech 
might sway a council 
like a change in the breeze,
one leading to a sibilance of spruces, 
one to the vowel of a duck cry,
while the dumb Ob 
widens its swerves into marshland 
without end or definition.
The Nenets. The Komi. The Khanty.
Each arrives at a name, one word 
finally uttered. At the logging camp 
an old man washing pans 
feeds a girl from the Institute's 
microphone with syllables 
from his grandmother's larder.
He steals the cassete player 
for his nephews in Murmansk 
and the end of the line
is a footnote. The Udmuts. 
The Mordvin. The Mansi. 
Did they know they'd arrived 
and there was nothing for it but to wait,
unmoving, for the chainsaws 
ruling a new edge to the forest, 
new smoke rising, uttered
once, and losing definition 
as it thins towards them
like geese of a dwindling species 
trying for true North
again
again?
That Grave, Heptonstall Churchyard
for TB
I'm not here now; you've never been 
and she?
She's here in name. Put in her place.
All round her, life on life's defined 
by family:
Beloved Husband... Wife Of The Above...
And dates, 
the years from Sadly Missed to Reunited. 
Here it's life that puts asunder; death 
consolidates 
but still needs edging. There's a splashy blurt 
of strimmer. Smells 
of cut green. Her plot's earth, no kerb, 
a give-and-take of weeds along the border. 
Now the bells 
jar, two notes slipping out of phase 
that blur 
like two tongues round one language, half 
a tone apart, like English and American 
in you, in her -
half rhymes, the way your lips make marry
sound like merry.
So the continental drift of vowels 
and lives breeds ironies, which epitaphs 
are meant to bury.
I'm not here, not now, but writing this 
upstairs, alone
and with you, also not here, in the way 
that words can do, the kind that won't be 
set in stone. 
Around the church graves lie like hatches 
battened down.
In place. Does she belong? Do we? Where 
else could these thoughts be at home but on
disputed ground?
Mock Orange
Keep it, he thought, and watch it wither. 
A controlled experiment.
A tissue sample, tested 
to destruction. Science against sentiment. 
It was limp in a week; in a month, 
crisp as a wing case in the spider's nook; 
in two, a Haversham gown 
already, with that age-scorched look,
no scent, so little body 
to its parchment, the touch of a pen 
would destroy it. There, it's gone. 
But it's not. He starts over again. 
*
Evaluate. Record. Two, three hours of seminar. 
A working lunch. A breath outside, 
and a throwaway line, a dare, and there they are 
with a sprig each from someone else's garden 
back for two, three hours more 
of what he can't remember, can't remember anything 
except how she twirled hers, absently, 
stroking the curve of her throat while listening, 
down to the dip between the collar bones. He 
found his still in his hand, and hid it, coming home.
*
Keep it, he thought, and watch it wither. 
Now it's scentless, colourless, 
QED, stick to science; resist 
temptation to play alchemist, 
to pound it in a mortar, to a white 
dust potent as cocaine, 
the flower of albescence, something 
dying for a change. 
No, let it wither, husks of flight
like the butterfly wings 
good children used to save to press 
into pictures of quite other things, 
ball gowns, waterfalls - that 
was the art of it. Under glass 
they're antiques now, and the children 
more gone than the butterflies. Let it pass...

*
... or with its own dried twig 
like a pin through the thorax, 
classify it. But tonight it's him 
the collector who's nailed to the page, 
squirming, just out of reach 
of his numbing formaldehyde, 
while the wings of all the moments 
caught, or not quite, whisper 
in the air around him, taunting. 
One brushes his cheek.
Sweet Bird
Rare, yes, but what could she do with it?
On some other island those flashes of aqua, 
viridian, bleeding-heart cerise 
might be bridal tokens or hard currency. 
Nothing convertible here. 
It hunched on her windowsill. Hungry?
Hurt? She put out a saucer and scraps. 
What if it was a protected species; 
if it died, who'd be liable? 
She'd ease it back to the wild...
It flew up to a treetop. Twitched about 
once like a compass needle. Dropped 
from sight. Back home, 
it had got there before her, 
draped across the table like a poacher's pheasant 
asking to be trussed and hung. Or mounted, 
though she'd never been the trophy type. 
By the phone off the hook she could see 
it had been at the Yellow Pages; 
the taxidermist was already on his way, 
a home call, with scalpel and bodkin 
and sealable bags. He wouldn't be fobbed off. 
Someone would be a collector's piece 
before the night was out. But love, love 
love, it sang, as if that was all there was to say.
Love and Co.
Down the rabbit hole, now, in no time, as 
your eyes lock, before you can think 
It could happen, it has:
the old voice-over. You,
it whispers, swish as automatic doors,
could be that holiday for two,
both your lives left well 
behind, still going round without you 
like suitcases on the airport carousel.
Take this one-in-a-lifetime chance 
of a timeshare. (It's a fenced-off plot 
where the dust-devils dance 
through the wire.) Catch the wink 
of a gold tooth when the sales rep smiles, 
that handshake fastened with a clink 
of rings borrowed from several hands.
Done. Before you can think.
Hungry Ghosts in Happy Eater
One stage on the Tibetan Wheel of Life is occupied by the Hungry Ghosts; with huge stomachs and tiny mouths, they can never satisfy their hungers.
These two, wanting so much 
they could eat each other 
up, all up 
and they'd be gone
leaving what 
for the damage assessors, 
the investigators, 
but a napkin 
crumpled like the story of a life 
neatly dropped on a plate 
and food uneaten 
and the bill unpaid 
and two chairs facing,
empty to the brim 
with wants 
like the guests 
at a spoilt kid's party
wide-eyed 
as the rabbit-mould 
pink jelly, cut, 
slumps like a last 
chance missed
to tense and twitch
and leap away?
Time Lapse
Already going, it may have been gone 
before he'd raised a glass - 
absent friends: 
the midnight that wouldn't be hers 
for eight hours yet was off 
sweeping west, 
sweeping brilliant moments, congas, party 
popper tangle, fireworks falling, 
Auld Lang Syne
into its bin bag; off-road, over hills now, over 
cloggy levels and the shot-silk silt fields 
of the estuary,
a radio mast, a lightship rocked by the Atlantic.
Sweeping foam tips up like sawdust, 
broken glass
and resolutions, now it panned its beam 
of dark across, a time-zone wide, 
not remembering
him to her or anyone to anyone, as if 
forgetting was its job. A year 
between us now, 
he thought, and what if time, once slipped, 
went on slipping? If he slept 
he might open his eyes 
to find it decades or a different life, 
a bed round which, uneasy,
unfamiliar 
wife and children watch him wake, afraid 
as for a moment he can't 
recollect himself.
Tact
Dr Sun-Yat-Sen Garden, Vancouver)
A floating leaf pokes up its head, 
a lacquered eye stripe, and becomes a terrapin. 
Each pebble is deliberate:
sharp/white for yang, smooth/black for yin.
Outside the tile-topped walls a crane, 
wires, intersection lights... Inside, waist high 
 raddled limestone
in a tank of stillness - bonsai 
mountains. Though if those 
are mountains how huge are the carp that rise 
through the pools? And me? 
A giant suddenly embarrassed by his size. 
Can't budge... till in the courtyard,
slow as dancing underwater, Tai Chi Chuan 
unwraps the movements of its doers 
like an endless present. One young man, 
sea-urchin-haired, with droopy dungarees 
unhitched on one side, stoops and sweeps and smooths 
the space around him. Out, 
along his gaze, the movement moves 
beyond his finger tips, a cast 
coil, as if silt-thick eddies veered and stirred 
the liquid time has slowed to.
Tact: to be, precisely, when a word 
might break the surface tension 
like a not-yet-lover's not-quite-accidental touch,
the shudder that runs through a life 
and moves on, out. I've said too much.
Underside
Lit from below
the pale grey-green of lichen, 
our faces drift away 
and away from ourselves
much as our rowboat drifts 
beneath this shallow arch 
that has stalactite dewlaps already. 
In a hush like a studio 
suddenly on air, a drip 
sends its ripples out 
up from under our faces 
and this low vault and the blades 
of our shipped and still dribbling oars, 
the way we play stray lights 
across each other - threat or love 
like the flash of a car in the street 
riffled back through a chink in the curtains... 
Yes, but quite indifferently. 
I can't help looking for the spot 
where long after the drop 
the rings keep coming
into being, light 
out of dark out of light, 
although you'd think there's nothing there. 
Gargangel
It began as a creaking, an ache in my stone
thews. There's a word for you, 
since words are all I've got from over-
looking centuries: gossip, hey-nonny-no 
and paternoster. Acid rain and organ wheeze 
had worn me down to bone and horn and wing, 
to a crick in the neck and a joke of a wing 
like a broken umbrella. Still, to be set in stone 
seemed like a future. Whose clever wheeze 
was it to set me trembling? And did you 
so much as frisk your hair or look up, downcast? No, 
it could have been a small cloud passing over, 
my shadow touching you. Then it was over
until, after dark, the first twinge in my wing,
a thin sinew unlocking. No, I said, no, 
I've seen it: crash; next morning, shattered stone
and the precinct taped off. Not me, thank you.
Figures my age are meant to spout and wheeze 
but not like this, not this bump-start wheeze 
inside my ribs. I thought all that was over 
centuries ago, that ridiculous It could be you...
from empty skies: How long since an angel wing-
beat last rattled the stained glass? Stone 
the crows, what are you made of? Could I say No,
leave me to crouch and crumble slowly? No! 
I struggled upright, with a rip and wheeze, 
uprooted, with a shower of dust and stone 
and for a moment I swayed, teetering over 
the stomach-punch drop, then unfurled a wing 
and launched out, where else but towards you, 
amazed, aloft, alone, as much I as you are you.
Dipping badly over Pulteney Street, no 
turning back now, I cranked up a wing 
beat, stiff, slow, with a whistle like the wheeze 
of pigeon panic. No-one looked up as I passed over 
homing on your sill, your narrow window, stone 
clunking stone and clinging, peering in - and saw you
squinting up, over your reading glasses. Now! But no, 
I squ-squ-wheeze but can't fit in, can't fold this wing.
Hanging Garden
If I did it again, it would have to be there 
in Devonian Gardens, in the warp and weft 
of downtown Calgary.
The street map's not much use. That square 
of green; it's nowhere, literally, 
on earth. Get there, the sign points skywards. 
You'd come, wouldn't you, 
in white, beside me, in the stainless lift, 
slipping up its glass tube 
snug as the plunger in a hypodermic? 
Three, four storeys high 
among mirrorshade windows pixelating
one another and the sky,
a seasick sway as gravity relaxes, then
we'd step out, you and I,
into rainforest. Insect fibrillations. Fountains 
like whippy ice cream.
In the recycled plosh, dazed koi. The garden, 
hanging, cradled by technology,
held for its own protection in a girder cage 
with all workings exposed,
no pretence: thrumming ducts thick as dustbins, 
fan-blowers in rows 
sigh like jet engines trundling to takeoff, 
fan blades idling, as if this 
were aircraft, hangar and departure lounge. 
Any moment now, the shift 
of pitch, the surge, the caught breath. Squeeze 
my hand, whoever you might be, 
and lead me past the crimson rope, the Private 
Function sign, where hourly
the brides and the grooms take their places 
and glow, and something 
like the first time ever is preserved; photographers 
make summer lightning
and glimpsed through undergrowth are faces, some 
just passing, some returning 
day after day among the spikes and fronds 
and bougainvillea to yearn in, 
it could be at us. My unknowable future, 
what couldn't we swear 
in all innocence? Yes, we'd say, yes.
It would have to be there.
Fosse Way, Grey Day 
Slap rapeseed yellow 
on a drystone landscape, 
a coat of new gloss that will peel 
when the subsidies shift. 
Paint it up to the edge 
of the skyline, the Camp
that's a worn-down reef of green, 
a sandbar where no end of history 
has grounded. A flat wheeze: 
that's Norbert Dentressangle hauling up 
to the Chariot's Rest for diesel, 
off the straight way there and back 
where every stop seems halfway:
the new ditch and rampart
round the lay-by where the gypsies were last year,
car-carcases and chrome trim,
bleeds of oil in the long grass; 
or Luke's Griddle Bar trailer 
with its flap up, bottles in a row 
like an apothecary's, ketchup red, 
brown Daddy's, mustard 
spry as rapeseed or the froth 
of stonecrop suddenly 
as sunlight, yellow out of grey.
Ground Control
A gust, and the skyline is bristling with them, 
cloud-slip behind them and wild blue bluster,
and what are they hefting, one-handed like butlers 
with trays of champagne flutes? Blades 
of six-foot wingspans like well-balanced spears, 
light as bird bone, and damsel fly bodies, cerise,
white, kingfisher, lime. Up close, it is a tribe 
of married-looking men in specs and mufflers, 
like a Scout troop from the Fifties. With the bluff
drop at their feet, the motorway miles down, 
and the wind, they take a roll call, surnames only 
then step to the edge. At the whistle they go, 
leaning forwards, balancing each model glider 
on the air, nose up, nose down, to teeter, 
then edge out of reach. Out of whisper. 
A single line sketch of itself, one turns 
as easily as frisking over in your sleep to run 
downwind, shaving the ridge, and the men 
come tracking downhill at a slant, in pairs,
across heather and ash and burnt gorse curls 
and violets. With black box and whiskery aerial,
eyes on the sky, each one trusts the other's 
two hands on his waist to steer him, leaning 
heads together, whispering like secrets 
where to, and where now to, put his feet.
Changes of Address
After he left 
it was the change-of-address slips 
that came from everywhichwhere now and then;
it was the way he made you fill 
whole pages of address book with him, 
him scored out again and again, 
like drafts of himself he had to mail you, 
brief as haiku and never quite right. 
It was the postcards from what might have been 
a holiday, with here and there a Ôwe' 
unexplained, that might be the family, the wife, 
the lover or the zeitgeist; most recently, 
this e-mail with a page-and-a-half 
of cc's like the credits at the end 
of a low budget film, and where he's @
is somewhere that is no place. 
So a pulse from the receding stars 
prints out as constellations on our flat 
earth minds, although they're years 
of light apart, and separate. It was, 
it is, the way he wants it known 
how far he's got... but who's to mark 
this correspondence course, this 
distance learning, in... what: Home 
as a Foreign Language?
Summerhouse Sauna
Estonia, 1997
Men, we don't touch. 
Even a handshake is a brisk clunk 
like a gear change - 
the crisper, the less ground lost. 
Here there's nothing between us. 
See our buttock-marks in sweat 
flank to flank on the wooden slat shelf. 
We're racked like loaves in an oven; 
this could be some lesser waiting room 
in Hell, lit by the glimmer 
of the bow-legged stove
that squats like a grudge in armour. 
A dip of the copper ladle
in the bucket, a splash on the pigs 
of scrap iron that stand in for stones,
and steam takes us all by the throat .
For a moment we're boggle-eyed 
all in the same no-language.
The first word anyone has breath for 
is a victory and goes down like a joke.
Outside, we lope down to a pool
edged in bin-liner black 
as if we'd evaded the hunt. Unmanned, 
scrotum shrunk to a prune, 
we gasp, duck and come up to mist 
in the birches, that sparkles the skin 
of the pond, and our own pink as babies. 
We could start again from here. 
The Ice Factory
'Not a great deal is known about this minor industry, 
which appears to have had a short life.' Helen Harris,
Industrial Archaeology of Dartmoor.
A hush like a shut Bible. Father: 'Grace
will wait...' The latch clacks. Our stare 
lifts from our cold meat, from the empty place 
to the door... and Cousin Joseph. His chair 
grates on the flags, and Father: 'Now
let us pray...'
Who knew him? Slow 
to speak or laugh, slow at the plough, 
some kind of fool, they said. I'd go 
to fetch him in from the topmost field:
'This place don't give us nothing free
but rain. So Father says.'
He smiled.
November, bitter drizzle. He 
went up the hillside as the cloud came down. 
December, snow penned us behind doors. 
The first clear morning, we'd see thin 
tracks, wavering slightly, up into the moor. 
In March, I followed. Jumbled stone 
in a windy hollow; black peat-water riffling;
a turf-wadded hut. 'You've come alone?'
He prised the door, “Then look.” Nothing, 
I saw nothing, or a glistening black, before 
the ice-cold took my breath. His chill 
smile: 'Things aren't always where 
they're needed. Are we, girl?'
April,
he was gone. Was seen halfway to town, 
cart lumbering under bales of moss and straw, 
steaming and dripping. 'Taking water down,'
they laughed. 'Thought that's what river's for.'
Then nothing. Though the horse was found 
by the docks where the tall ships come. All year 
they traded stories - 'mad', 'enlisted', 'drowned'
- and tell them still for any stranger's beer 
since the farm's gone back to moor.
And now
this flimsy envelope: New York. Inside, 
'My father would have wished...'
He was rich, somehow.
Had grandsons. Mentioned me before he died.
